International Journal of Economics and Business Administration
Volume VIII, Issue 2, 2020
pp. 65-86

FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance:
An Extensive Literature Review
Submitted 08/01/20, 1st revision 30/01/20, 2nd revision 10/02/20, accepted 03/04/20

Mustafa Raza Rabbani1, Shahnawaz Khan2, Eleftherios I. Thalassinos3
Abstract:
Purpose: The paper aims to review the academic research work done in the area of Islamic
financial technology. The Islamic FinTech area has been classified into three broad
categories of the Islamic FinTech, Islamic Financial technology opportunities and
challenges, Cryptocurrency/Blockchain sharia compliance and law/regulation. Finally, the
study identifies and highlights the opportunities and challenges that Islamic Financial
institutions can learn from the conventional FinTech organization across the world.
Approach/Methodology/Design: The study collected 133 research studies (50 from Social
Science Research Network (SSRN), 30 from Research gate, 33 from Google Scholar and 20
from other sources) in the area of Islamic Financial Technology. The study presents the
systematic review of the above studies.
Findings: The study classifies the Islamic FinTech into three broad categories namely,
Islamic FinTech opportunities and challenges, Cryptocurrency/Blockchain sharia
compliance and law/regulation. The study identifies that the sharia compliance related to the
cryptocurrency/Blockchain is the biggest challenge which Islamic FinTech organizations are
facing. During our review we also find that Islamic FinTech organizations are to be
considered as partners by the Islamic Financial Institutions (IFI’s) than the competitors. If
Islamic Financial institutions want to increase efficiency, transparency and customer
satisfaction they have to adopt FinTech and become partners with the FinTech companies.
Practical Implications: The study will contribute positively to the understanding of Islamic
Fintech for the academia, industry, regulators, investors and other FinTech users.
Originality/Value: The study believes to contribute positively to understanding of Fintech
based technology like cryptocurrency/Blockchain from sharia perspective.
Keywords: Blockchain, cryptocurrency, FinTech, Islamic finance, Sharia compliance.
JEL classification: G15, G32.
Paper Type: Literature review study.

1

Department of Finance and Accounting, College of Business Administration, Kingdom
University, Bahrain, e-mail: m.rabbani@ku.edu.bh
2
Department of Information Technology, University College of Bahrain, Bahrain,
e-mail: skhan@ucb.edu.bh
3
Professor, University of Pireaus, Affiliate Professor University of Malta,
e-mail: thalassinos@ersj.eu

FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance: An Extensive Literature Review
66

1. Introduction
Financial technology is one of the most widespread term used for research in finance
industry in present time. Financial Technology (FinTech) is the use of modern
innovative technology in the field of finance. It is basically the use of innovative and
disruptive technology for providing the financial services. Fintech as a concept
peaked up the in the late 2010s (Haddad, 2018). Fintech catered to this need of more
security for the investors by providing innovative and secured financial services. The
other reason for the emergence of Fintech could be attributed to the need for the
financial services at more affordable cost which provides mobility and faster pace
(Anikina et al., 2016). The primary reason for the emergence of FinTech has been
the global financial crisis of 2008 (Haddad, 2018). Global Financial crisis was the
period where people lost confidence in the financial system and were looking for
something which gives them more assurance in terms of their investment. The
severity of financial crisis in 2008 has laid the way for Islamic Financial systems to
emerge as the vehicle of recovery from financial crisis (Hussain, 2010).
The answer to the reason why FinTech is happening now is that FinTech innovations
are more genuine and they are unlike the previous innovations in the financial
services (Rupeika-Apoga et al., 2018: Thalassinos et al., 2015a; 2015b). These
innovations are changing the lives of the people and they associated the common
people they are genuine, having an infrastructure effect (Schindle, 2017). Islamic
FinTech (Financial technology) is any Fintech catering to the needs of the Islamic
financial institutions and are designed to asper the principles laid down by sharia.
The paper aims to review the academic research work done in the area of Islamic
financial technology. The Islamic FinTech area has been classified into three broad
categories of the Islamic FinTech, Islamic Financial technology opportunities and
challenges, Cryptocurrency/Blockchain sharia compliance and law/regulation.
It is estimated that the global cumulative investment in FinTech will exceed $1.5
billion in the next 3-5 years (PWC, 2019). Banks and financial institutions across the
world are facing the most difficult time as there is lack of innovation in banking and
finance industry (Tornjanski et al., 2015; Alt, 2018; Thalassinos, 2008; Thalassinos
et al., 2010; 2014; Jędrzejowska-Schiffauer et al., 2019) and FinTech has come as a
blessing in disguise for these organizations as it provides more opportunities with
enough innovation and tech-based services (Dapp, 2015). There is still no consensus
about the term FinTech, still some of the most popular definitions of FinTech is
summarized as follows:
FinTech as a term emerged in 1972 by Abraham Leo Bettinger by saying “FinTech
can be defined as a contraction which combines bank experience and expertise with
information technology” (Bettinger, 1972). Schueffel (2017) said “FinTech is the
new term in finance industry and objective of which is to improve the financial
services through the use of technology”. Milian et al. (2019) mentioned that
“FinTech is a thrill or hype in the media or an important innovation which can be

M.R. Rabbani, S. Khan, E.I. Thalassinos
67

attributed to the field of finance”. According to IOSCO (2017) “it is the innovative
business models that that can transform the finance industry”. Oxford Dictionary
defines “FinTech is the traditional financial services provided through the use of
information technology”. In the words of Dorfeitner et al. (2017) “FinTech is
basically the composition of companies or group of companies providing the
modern, innovative and financial services through technologies” while Sanicola
(2019) said “FinTech is about both, promoting the technology to enhance the use of
financial and also about the promotion and growth of digital consulting”.
However, from the definitions mentioned above, from the authors’ perspective,
definitions cover only some of the aspects of the activities which are using financial
technologies. FinTech can be defined as following: “FinTech is the fusion of
Information Technology and Finance for providing the financial services at an
affordable cost with a seamless user experience”.
2. Islamic FinTech Opportunities and Challenges
The future of Islamic finance especially Islamic FinTech is very good in Muslim
countries. The development of mobile and smartphone has paved way for the growth
of FinTech in these countries. Of course, these opportunities are not without
challenges the biggest challenge for the Islamic FinTech companies are about
regulation and lack of good and authentic research in the Islamic Fintech sector
(Brian, 2017; Firmansyah and Anwar, 2019). Another study (Firmansyah and
Ramdani, 2018) argued that the presence of Islamic Fintech companies can help the
startups in an effective way. It will be a good boost for the young graduates as there
is a lack of organizations who support the young graduate aspirants with sharia
compliance financing.
Fintech has grown at the double pace in the European region, in fact, at a twice rate
than the Silicon Valley since 2008. Since, 2011 the volume of FinTech deals in
London region has increased by three times and is more than 50% of the all
European activity (Skan, 2014). There is a scope for the new financial technology
companies, and it can be achieved through the wide range of financial services and
respect from the clients. It is very critical for the development of financial services
companies and banks as development and growth of FinTech companies will give an
option to the customers to use both traditional financial services as well as new and
innovative services provided through the FinTech companies (Gomber, 2018; 2017;
Saksonova and Merlino, 2017). The FinTech companies have given traditional banks
a lifeline to go digital and provide financial services at a low cost. In a country like
Czech Republic the low-cost banking with Fintech will help the banks to compete
with the larger and more established banks (Hes and Jilkova, 2016).
Islamic FinTech is based on the ethos and value of Sharia and it has the ability to
lead the finance world across the globe. The biggest advantage with the Islamic
Fintech is that it is transparent, accessible and easy to use (Laldin, 2018;

FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance: An Extensive Literature Review
68

Wintermeyer, 2017). The global financial crisis has not affected the financial
performance of the Islamic banks because of the nature of the Islamic finance, it has
emerged as an alternative to the conventional finance. With the emergence of
Islamic FinTech, it provides Islamic banks an opportunity to make the finance world
better and emerge as an alternative finance with more transparency and ethical
values (Satyawati et al., 2017). Technological changes are just the beginning of the
things to come the innovation in finance and banking industry (Arize et al., 2018). It
is really important for the Islamic financial institutions to be prepared and embrace
the changes. Sharia compliance Islamic FinTech has the capability to attract 150
million new customers in the next 3 years (Wonglimpiyarat, 2017; Chen, 2018).
However, it is expected to grow further as we are expecting the explosion in the
growth of Muslim population as the Muslim population is expected to reach 3 billion
by 2060 (Cooper, 2018). Till that date, Malaysia, UK and Indonesia are holding the
first three position in terms of Islamic FinTech startups (Cooper, 2018). Another
study (Rusydiana, 2018) concluded that the biggest obstacle for developing the
Islamic FinTech has been the lack of trained human personnel and clear policy from
the government. Researchers further states that to develop a proper ecosystem for the
development of Islamic FinTech in the country the government has to bring proper
regulation, educational intuitions have to bring good researches and provide trained
personnel. The success of Islamic Fintech can be associated to the number of
financial service areas where FinTech can be linked to, for example, it can be linked
to the cryptocurrencies, blockchain and other areas such as cross border payments
(Gambler, 2018; Michalopoulos and Tsermenidis, 2018). Islamic FinTech needs to
keep itself at pace with the rapid development going in the conventional finance
world. In fact, the opportunities for Islamic finance is more than the conventional
finance because the basic concept of FinTech-shared capital is in accordance with
the rules prescribed by the sharia. Islamic FinTech has the same values and ethics
which are the basics of Islamic Finance (Alam, 2019a; Haqqi, 2018).
The development of Islamic Fintech provides great opportunities for the developing
countries, as it provides the cost-effective solution to the financial services. At the
same time, it also tests the regulating bodies to maintain the stability and to protect
the investors and institutions from the fraudulent trade practices (Saba, 2019). In
order to make sure that Islamic FinTech is growing and having sustainable
development, an awareness program among the university students can be started
among those who are using the technologies (Saad, 2019). If Fintech want to be
relevant in the longer period of time, it must be innovative as adoption of FinTech
by the Islamic financial institutions are not only affecting the Muslim community,
but it also affects the non-Muslims and global finance world (Irfan, 2019).
Fintech has become a challenge for the financial institutions which can be turned
into opportunities by making FinTech companies partners in providing innovative
services than treating them as competitors (Cristea and Thalassinos, 2016;
Thalassinos and Thalassinos, 2006). The main risk associated with the development

M.R. Rabbani, S. Khan, E.I. Thalassinos
69

of FinTech is that banks are exposed at every level (Anil, 2019; Romanova and
Kudinska, 2017; Rabbani, 2016). FinTech is still new and the firms are not able to
make sure how much investments are worth investing as far as Fintech projects are
concerned (Lee, 2018). To overcome this challenge, banks and Fintech firms needs
to sit together and integrate and evaluate their efforts. The Fintech and banks are
needed to evaluate their value proposition in terms of integrating innovation and
FinTech (Coates, 2015; Drasch et al., 2018). The opportunities and challenges of
Islamic Fintech are summarized as in the following Table 1.
Table 1. Islamic FinTech Opportunities and Challenges
Islamic FinTech Opportunities
Islamic Fintech companies can help the
new startups in a big way
Islamic FinTech companies can provide a
wide range of innovative products and
services.
It provides an option to the customers to
use both traditional financial services as
well as new and innovative services.
It can provide cost-effective solution to the
financial services and will give a lifeline to
traditional Islamic banks to go digital and
provide financial services at a low cost.
Islamic Fintech is transparent, accessible
and easy to use and can gain customer
confidence easily.
It can be linked to the cryptocurrencies,
Blockchain and other areas such as cross
border payments.
It can easily gain the confidence of Muslim
investors as it is in accordance with the
rules prescribed by the sharia.

Islamic FinTech Challenges
Lack of good and authentic research in the
Islamic Fintech sector.
Developing the Islamic FinTech has been
the lack of trained human personnel and
clear policy from the government.
Educational intuitions must bring good
researches and provide trained personnel
and academic researchers must provide
good research.
Islamic FinTech needs to keep itself at pace
with the rapid development going in the
conventional finance world.
Islamic FinTech must maintain the stability
and must protect the investors and
institutions from the fraudulent trade
practices.
The banks are exposed at every level as
technology brings more transparency.
Since, Islamic FinTech is still new and
investors are not able to make sure how
much investments are worth investing.

3. Islamic Fintech and Regulatory Challenges
Fintech is already giving massive benefits to the users and investors. With the evergrowing competitions from the FinTech firms the service providers are forced to
adopt the consumer centric approach. However, the evolution of Fintech also brings
a lot of risks to the investors and regulators and they must find ways to safeguard the
interest of the both, investors and consumers. For the consumer, the evolution of
FinTech is a win-win situation as they are benefitting from the new and innovative
financial services and existing financial services are made more competitive and
affordable as well (Wijayanti, 2017; Loo, 2018). As the development of FinTech has
evolved over different eras but post global financial crisis of 2008 the need for more
stringent regulation was felt. Now, the focus has shifted from products or services

FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance: An Extensive Literature Review
70

delivered to the use of technology in delivering the services. Now, it posts a great
challenge to the regulators and developers to make a correct balance between the
benefits of the new innovations and the risk it brings (Arner, 2015; 2016; Ladin,
2017). The fast and rapid development in Fintech can be equally disruptive if it is
not regulated properly (Vijayanti, 2017). As the FinTech is in its early stage of
development and the impact of FinTech on various stakeholders can only be
understood by using the dimensions such as regulation (Sangwan, 2019).
FinTech companies need to be more alert regarding the massive transformation
going in the industry as it will impact the Fintech companies and they have to find
ways to deal with these transformations (Lee and Shin, 2018). Since FinTech is at
the early stage of innovation so instead of putting this into rigorous regulation, a
more flexible and principle-based strategy are to be adopted.
The approach of regulatory authority should be kind and easy going to foster more
innovation (Tsai and Peng, 2017). Regulatory Technology (RegTech) is the future of
financial regulation as the need for regulating the FinTech companies increases the
demand for RegTech will also increase. RegTech development will make the
regulators to feel for developing and reconceptualization of existing FinTech
regulation (CGAP, 2018; Armour, 2016). The big data approach is to be used for
regulating the new FinTech organizations and new generation of RegTech
organizations are needed for the online reporting and streamlining and providing the
software for regulation (Treleaven, 2015; Shahnawaz, 2019). The externalities can
be considered as a consequence of failure of financial market and it should be
conceptualized to responsibility failure. This reconceptualization will make the
government and regulating bodies to make a law that will consider this cost as
internal cost (Schwarcz 2013; Rabbani 2020a).
The regulatory regime needs to be principle-based regulation to make a balance
between the stability and access to the financial services provided by FinTech
organizations (Tsai, 2016). It is very difficult to bring a uniform law which brings all
of them under one umbrella because of the decentralized nature of the financial
services provided by the FinTech organizations (Peter, 2015). Disruptive innovation
has the potential to bring positive changes in the life of the people and it can be
achieved if we have more relaxed, liberal and principal-based approach in regulating
the Fintech organization (Anagnostopoulos, 2018).
Regulating the Islamic Fintech is a challenge, the industry has already made a target
for the standardizing and developing the Islamic FinTech regulation (Natoor, 2019).
As the rapid growth of fintech and Islamic FinTech continues, it provides both
opportunities and threat to the policymakers and regulators. The policymakers and
regulators must take into account the adoption ad acceptance of Islamic FinTech by
making the proper balance between the benefit it brings as well as the threat it poses
in terms of increased risk (Miskam, 2018; Rabbani, 2020b) as the sharia-based
contracts are more complex than the conventional finance contracts. In fact, the

M.R. Rabbani, S. Khan, E.I. Thalassinos
71

emergence and adoption of FinTech by the Islamic financial institutions is the
solution to the regulatory challenges they were facing before. It will bring more
transparency and FinTech regulators can benefit from the innovations (Finnovasia,
2017). The players in the mega FinTech world constitute of banks, newly startups
and FinTech companies. In most of the countries, the regulatory framework is still
evolving and is in conflict with some of the existing regulations. The Islamic
FinTech can benefit from all these by bringing more acceptable ways of regulation
to stakeholders (Gassner and Lawrence, 2018; Financial Market Authority, 2017).
The success of Innovation in the FinTech industry lies with the transparent and clear
regulation and with the introduction of new startups, banks, and financial innovation
companies, the need for the formal regulation of the Fintech companies have
increased (Alam et al., 2019b; MacDonagh, 2016). New and innovative technologies
are to be encouraged as they benefit the consumer at large and RegTech applies to
all these organizations to overcome their regulatory challenges (FCA, 2019).
Rapidly growing Fintech provides a challenge to financial regulators who are
already facing the challenge of regulating the financial institutions after the financial
crisis. ‘Regulatory Sandboxes’ aims to encourage the innovations and test their
innovations in the safe environment (Bromberg, 2017; Godwin 2017).
In another study related to Fintech in the European Union (EU) countries (Bajakic,
2019; Fetai, 2015; Thalassinos and Thalassinos, 2018) reveals that EU provides the
platform to FinTech companies to promote innovation in the area of financial
services while safeguarding the interest of the consumers and investors. The goal of
EU is to empower all these companies to provide tech enabled technologies such as
Big data (Shahnawaz, 2019), Artificial Intelligence (AI), blockchain and
cryptocurrency. Promoting and encouraging the innovation is more than just
regulating these organizations (Bijakic, 2019). Islamic fund management is
embracing technology, and this is a disruption and it creates a kind of new concern
for the regulators and provides the opportunities. AI has become synonyms to the
Islamic fund management (Miskam, 2019). The following Table 2 summarizes the
opportunities and threats for Islamic Fintech.
Table 2. Regulations and Islamic Fintech
Regulation as an opportunity for
boosting Islamic FinTech
The externalities can be considered because
of the failure of financial market and it
should be conceptualized to responsibility
failure.
The government and regulating bodies to
make a law that will consider the cost of
regulations as an internal cost.
The regulation should be relaxed, liberal
and principal-based approach in regulating
the Fintech organization.

Regulation as a threat for Islamic
FinTech
The financial regulators who are already
facing the challenge of regulating the
financial institutions after the financial
crisis
The regulation brings balance between the
benefit it brings as well as the threat it poses
in terms of increased risk
The regulatory framework is still evolving
and conflict with some of the existing
regulations.

FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance: An Extensive Literature Review
72

4. Blockchain and Islamic Finance
Blockchain technology has gained a lot of attention and has attracted worldwide
interest from a variety of stakeholders. Blockchain and artificial intelligence is the
new trend for Fintech innovations. Artificial Intelligence use a variety of approaches
such as artificial neural network (Khan, 2011; Shahnawaz, 2011), rule-based
approach (Shahnawaz, 2013a), statistical approach (Shahnawaz, 2013b), case-based
reasoning (Shahnawaz, 2015) and many more and has been used in wide range of
applications such as sentiment analysis (Shahnawaz, 2017), machine translation
(Khan, 2018), image processing, self-deriving automobiles, chatbot (Khan, 2020)
etc. Blockchain technology has several evident advantages because of its nature and
the underlying technological structure. Blockchain is a collection of linked blocks on
a peer to peer network where blocks are connected using cryptographic hash code
because of which there is no single point of failure. As even if a few nodes fail in the
peer to peer network, other nodes will continue to work which makes blockchain
more reliable to operate and maintain. Second vital feature of the blockchain is that
it is digital technology which enables it to be applied in a variety of applications.
Another crucial feature of blockchain is the transparency, blockchain transactions
are traceable and visible to all the users of the blockchain. Immutability is another
key feature of the blockchain. It is almost impossible to make any changes to the
transactions on blockchain or to the blockchain. However, some very rare cases have
been found for blockchain changes. Many theorists have been predicting that the
financial services will be disrupted using blockchain technology in the coming
future.
Blockchain is an expanding list of blocks. Each block contains transaction data, a
timestamp and a cryptographic hash code of the previous block (Nakamoto, 2008).
The key interesting feature of the blockchain is its resistance to data modification
and trackable transactions. Therefore, blockchain, if used fairly, can be a boon to the
Islamic banking and finance for providing trackable transactions and transparency. It
can boost the trust in Islamic financial dealings, transfers and transactions (AbuBakar, 2018).
A Fintech study in Islamic banking discusses one of the major issues which is to find
out if the agent is working in the best interest of the stakeholders. This research
proposes a blockchain based monitoring process for transparency of the form and
degree of accountability of the Islamic Bank (agent). Though, smart contracts still
have neither been accepted legally nor have been regulated by the government in
majority of the countries around the globe where Islamic Banking is available.
However, this study advocates the use of blockchain and smart contract in the agent
monitoring process so that all the key stakeholders (Sharia Supervisory Boards,
contributors, governmental regulators and beneficiaries) in Islamic banking can have
transparency in all the agent dealing (Lacasse, 2018). If we ignore the fact of the

M.R. Rabbani, S. Khan, E.I. Thalassinos
73

legality, blockchain based monitoring process can be useful tool in Islamic Fintech
(Lacasse, 2018). Smart contract transactions can create a record of ownership and
assets and these transactions are immutable and trackable. As per Lawrence (2017),
the use of smart contracts as replacement of the financial contracts and services cost
can be minimized by up to 95% and Islamic Banking can be revolutionized. One
aspect of the Islamic Finance and Banking is to contribute to the social causes.
Contributors usually mandate Islamic Finance and Banking agents for this task and
give them the decree for transferring contributions according to Shariah for the
social causes on their behalf. There is an assumption related to agency theory that
Finance and Banking agents seek to maximize their compensation and welfare.
However, smart contracts can be a useful mechanism in all financial transactions and
the monitoring and regulation process can be reduced to mere writing a smart
contract (Lacasse, 2017).
A research study considers Blockchain management system (BMS) as an accounting
system (Evans, 2015). Blockchain based systems like Bitcoin can be used as a
reliable solution for various types of transactions. In Bitcoin, peer to peer network
nodes verifies the transactions. The transactions are recorded in a distributed public
network and linked using cryptography. The application of blockchain in the
financial sector is observing new avenues in various domains every day. One of
such application is in the domain of crowdfunding, a research by Muneeza (2018)
discuss the application of blockchain in crowdfunding. Research suggests that the
use of blockchain technology in crowdfunding can diminish the issues faced on
crowdfunding platforms based on six crowdfunding platforms (Muneeza, 2018).
Fundraisers can use smart contracts or issue their own shares providing a guarantee
to return pledge contributions in case funding targets are not met. This type of
guarantee will help the initiators of the projects and as well as crowdfunding
shareholders in securing their rights at a minimal cost (Zhu and Zhou, 2016). Some
of the challenges in traditional banking are multiple intermediate, a central fund
management party, high transactions cost, centralized database management and
double payments etc. However, the use of the blockchain based crowdfunding
system can overcome these challenges. Along with these, a blockchain based
crowdfunding system can add new functionalities such as a blockchain based voting
system can include shareholders and crowd in corporate governance, smart contracts
can be used to detect fundraising frauds (Niforos et al., 2017; Zhu and Zho, 2016),
identity management system to avoid identity theft (Niforos et al., 2017) and use of
digital currency can eliminate central intermediary (Biancone, 2019; Collins and
Baeck, 2015).
Blockchain technology can be used to streamline the financial transactions. Some
estimates have suggested that blockchain technology can help the financial
institutions to save at least $20 billion in cross border payment, regulatory, and
settlement costs (Fanning, 2016). Saadiqin is a Shariah compliant industrial financial
solution and claims 80% reduction in outstanding issues, 50% reduction of your

FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance: An Extensive Literature Review
74

close-of-business times and 99% efficiency in operation (Saadiqin, 2020). Although,
integrating blockchain with existing financial solutions is not a simple task. Efforts
have been made in the direction of integrating existing digital solutions with
blockchain with the help of third-party software (Alidin, 2018). It can give a new
direction in the use of blockchain for Islamic finance and Shariah compliant
financial services. The following Table 3 outlines the major issues of Islamic
Finance and advantages and some applications of using Blockchain in Islamic
Fintech.
Table 3. Major issues of Islamic Finance and advantages and some applications of
using Blockchain in Islamic Fintech
Advantages
No single point of failure.
It can easily detect frauds.
Blockchain transactions are transparent and are traceable and visible to all the users of the
blockchain.
It is almost impossible to make any changes to the transactions on blockchain or to the
blockchain.
Smart contracts can be a useful mechanism in all financial transactions and the monitoring
and regulation process can be reduced to mere writing a smart contract.
Financial contracts and services cost can be minimized by up to 95%.
Applications
Blockchain management system (BMS) as an accounting system.
Domain of crowdfunding etc.
Issues in Islamic Finance
Major issues which is to find out if the agent is working in the best interest of the
stakeholders.
Agents seeks to maximize their compensation and welfare.

5. Cryptocurrency, Bitcoin and Islamic Finance
Cryptocurrency is the electronic cash which can be used in place of the fiat money as
a medium of exchange. It uses blockchain technology which provides basis for
secure, trackable and immutable financial transactions. The creation of additional
units is also controlled with the help of blockchain (Andy, 2011; Polansek, 2016).
Cryptocurrency systems do not have a central control system unlike the traditional
central banking systems and digital currency like Amazon cash etc., (Allison, 2015).
One major issue every digital cash payment network has is double spending. Double
spending means that the same amount has been spent twice by the same entity. In
digital cash payment network, a central server keeps the balance record to stop
double spending. In cryptocurrency systems, there is no centralized system, it is a
decentralized network, therefore, the network keeps the history and list of all the
transactions and any transactions has to be approved by the peers which eliminates
the case of double spending (Ameer, 2018).

M.R. Rabbani, S. Khan, E.I. Thalassinos
75

The cryptocurrency capitalization has direct causal relationship with the bank
deposits. As the investment in cryptocurrency increases the deposit in the bank
account decreases. In order to remove this threat, the only option left with the bank
is to offer cryptocurrency as an alternative investment offer to investors. The banks
are forced to embrace the cryptocurrency as the alternative investment in portfolio
diversification or they can adopt the Blockchain option to provide their customer a
low cost and highly secured and ease of use investment (Othman, 2019). Bitcoin is a
fairly new currency and its risks are unknown and most of the experts are of the
opinion that the use of bitcoin is to be avoided (Folkinshteyn, Lennon and Reilly
2015). Virtual currency is unlike real currency and brings a lot of risk for the users
and it also poses a threat to the real economy (Zahudi, 2016). Despite of the fact that
bitcoin is one of the hottest properties, it has not received much attention from the
scholar community. Whatever little researches has been done, it is done either on
regulatory framework or on the technical aspect of the bitcoin. There is a lack of
research to examine bitcoin from currency perspective. Bitcoin must be promoted or
introduced as a complement to the fiat currency than the substitute to the fiat
currency (Carrick, 2016).
Muslim scholars have mixed views over sharia compliance of cryptocurrencies.
Some famous scholars like grand Mufti of Egypt Shaikh Shaki Alam, has out rightly
rejected the cryptocurrency on the ground that it violates the basic principles of
Islam that is declared haram. To be declared it halal, it must be complying with the
Maqasid al sharia. Those scholars or Mufties who are declaring Cryptocurrency as
haram have not understood the working of the term itself. There are more than 2800
cryptocurrencies and all of them are not currencies, they can be called as crypto
assets. The coin is not the only type of crypto assets. The crypto assets do not fulfill
the criteria of store of value, unit of account and medium of exchange to be called as
a currency (Yakubowski, 2019). Bitcoin cannot be accepted by the sharia scholar as
it provides the transactions which are prohibited by sharia.
There is an element of gharar in the bitcoin transaction as real value of currency is
not known, prices are highly volatile, also there is variance in store of value and
method of value. Because the fundamental principles of finance say that the gharar is
against the sharia and it is haram (Abu Bakar, 2017), gharar is defined as the
uncertainty, deception and risk. It is an Arabic word which is used for selling
something which is yet to exist (Ahmad, 2008; Cattelan, 2009). In another study on
Bitcoin and cryptocurrency it was concluded that since bitcoin lacks intrinsic value
and has zero supervision of the central bank it can easily be misused. It also violates
the basic principle of Islamic economics i.e., social justice, because of these reasons
the bitcoin is considered as against sharia and should be prohibited (Meera, 2018).
However, according to some researchers, Bitcoin cryptocurrency is a Nobel idea in
the society with ever popularity and demand for it. There is no proper evidence that
the bitcoin violates the sharia principles. The record increasing price of bitcoin (20k
USD on Dec. 12, 2018) does not mean that it is against the sharia principles. It only

FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance: An Extensive Literature Review
76

means the growing popularity and faith of the people in the bitcoin and
cryptocurrency (Oziev, 2018). Bitcoin can be discussed in two unique ways like
maslaha (benefits to the society) and risk sharing rather than the risk shifting. If talk
about the maslaha there are millions of muslim adults with just mobile phone and
internet connection are getting benefit from it and with regarding to risk sharing
bitcoin works on the principles of Musharakah where two or more persons come
together in doing a business and shares the risk. As in case of Bitcoin there is a large
pool of people, so risk is minimized (Evans, 2015). With the massive popularity of
cryptocurrency like Bitcoin, the talks are going on whether Central Banks should
issue their own digital currency named as Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC).
With Central Banks issuing their own digital currency will provide the individuals
an opportunity to open an account directly with the Central Bank and transact as
legal tender (Ahmat, 2017). According to a report published in Stellar blogspot,
‘Stellar’ has already become the first sharia certified distributed ledger protocol. The
sharia supervisory board from Bahrain has given certification and asked the financial
institutions to deploy the Stellar technology in Islamic financial institutions
(Alexandre, 2018). Cryptocurrency have presence of both haram and halal elements.
While declaring the cryptocurrency haram or halal it must be checked on transaction
to transaction basis. It is very difficult to say that the cryptocurrency is haram as a
whole (Asif, 2018). There is scope to develop the digital currency compatible with
Islam using Blockchain technology. If we are able to develop a digital currency
which is as per the ethos and principle of sharia, it will be a great revolution in the
field of finance and technological advancement (Alzubaidi and Abdullah, 2017).
Blockchain and cryptocurrency are a financial innovation and it can bring positive
changes in the lives of the Muslim community, scholars should review their decision
about declaring it haram (Abojeib, 2019).
There is a need to develop a new strategy for all section of society including,
consumer, government, financial institution and investors to cope and understand
this digital revolution. More insightful information is needed for understanding the
concept of Blockchain and cryptocurrency itself (Mohamed, 2018). For a sharia
scholar, it should be an ultimate objective to find ways to give benefits to all the
interested Muslim community through this financial revolution. Because digital
currency can take the shape of various sustainable and diversifiable projects. The
investment in cryptocurrency can not only give them profit but can also change their
lives for good (Noordin, 2018). The area of developing an Islamic digital currency
using the blockchain technology has also been investigated by some scholars
(Alzubaidi, 2017).
A significant number of cryptocurrencies is in operation in the present time. These
cryptocurrencies can be of various types and may use different types of algorithms.
However, for the sustainability of the cryptocurrency, it should observe all legal
requirements, as of now, there is no operational procedure or standard system which

M.R. Rabbani, S. Khan, E.I. Thalassinos
77

can verify compliance with legal requirements. This is a negative aspect of
cryptocurrency in the market which says that since there is no supervision, people
will lose the money. For any cryptocurrency, to be a sustainable cryptocurrency, it
should follow and sustain all legal requirements (Billah, 2019). The research by
Ibrahim (2017) has concluded that developing an Islamic digital currency is feasible.
6. Cryptocurrency and its Legality as per Sharia
Islamic scholars have mixed perspective in regard to cryptocurrency, some scholars
consider it permissible (halal) and some scholars consider it impermissible (haram).
The views, which keep cryptocurrency into the category of permissible, state its
principle and nature (Al-hussaini, 2019). There is clearly an inadequacy of Islamic
laws for cryptocurrency use in any form of transactions and there is a need of a
model and system for Islamic digital currency. There are views behind keeping
cryptocurrency into the category of impermissible such as violation of the
governmental constitution, uncertainties in the cryptocurrency implementation as
revealed in many fatwas and stated by many researchers. Another reason for
considering cryptocurrencies as impermissible is the uncertainty of its value because
the value of cryptocurrency can fluctuate because of variety of reasons such as a
system hack or a technical glitch etc., (Al-hussaini, 2019).
There are several known issues with paper-based currencies such as forgery,
unlimited supply, inflation and government abuse etc. If we consider these issues,
these are not in compliance with Shariah law as used in Islamic finance and banking
which implies that paper-based currency is not an ideal medium of exchange. On the
other hand, cryptocurrencies are more reliable, transparent, decentralized, limited in
supply and highly unlikely to be hacked (forgery and abuse) (Siswantoro, 2020;
Amri, 2019). Some researchers have a view related to the connectivity to the world
economy, some countries are not connected to the world economy, blockchain
technology and cryptocurrencies can bridge this gap and provide them the power
over their own wealth and security of their wealth without relying on a central
agency (Fait Muedini, 2018). However, because of digital divide many people
around the world do not have access to the internet which means many people
around the world won’t have access to money or medium of exchange.
A research by Oziev (2017) on Shariah perspective of cryptocurrency suggests that
cryptocurrency like Bitcoin can be considered permissible in certain scenarios such
as in the case of currency exchange or for the making the payments for services or
goods. However, because of the high instability in the exchange value of
cryptocurrencies, it is not permissible to acquire them for the purpose of
accumulation or for investment. According to Oziev (2017), the way of acquiring the
cryptocurrency is also an important aspect in the deciding the permissibility or
impermissibility, if the cryptocurrency has been acquired for the purpose of the
settlement of payments for goods or services then it is permissible, however, if the
cryptocurrency has been mined for saving and the miner has the intention that it will

FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance: An Extensive Literature Review
78

give high return in future, then it is nothing but speculation (maysir) and excessive
risk (garar) and is impermissible. Alam et al. (2019c) discusses that a cryptocurrency
can be permissible and even supported by government if it can overcome the
negative aspect of it. For example, if a cryptocurrency can provide some certainty in
the stability of exchange value, protection or surety from abuse of the
cryptocurrency such as usage in fraudulent activities and operation under Shariah
and Financial regulation, then it can be accepted as Islamic cryptocurrency.
In some of the major economies of the world such as China and Russia,
cryptocurrencies are banned because of the risk and safety reasons (Siswantoro,
2020). In Islamic countries, the cryptocurrencies face another challenge which is
their compliances with the Shariah law. Islamic countries such as Pakistan, Algeria,
Egypt, Morocco have banned cryptocurrencies partially and, in some countries,
completely. The reasons behind complete or partial ban of the cryptocurrency is its
compliance with the Shariah law and Islamic teachings on which different scholars
have different views. However, an important factor in permissibility or
impermissibility of the cryptocurrency is the purpose of acquiring it. If the purpose
of acquiring is to gain the profit then it is impermissible to own it according to
majority of the scholars and if the motives behind acquiring the cryptocurrency is
just to use as a medium of exchange then majority of the scholars keep it in the
permissible category. The following Table 4 sum up the permissibility and
impermissibility factors for Cryptocurrency as per Shariah.
Table 4. Permissibility and Impermissibility factors for Cryptocurrency as per
Shariah
Impermissible

Permissible

Impermissible due to violation of the
governmental constitution, uncertainties in
the cryptocurrency implementation.

Cryptocurrency
can
be
considered
permissible based on its principle and nature

Not permissible to acquire them for the
purpose of accumulation or for investment.

Permissible in certain scenarios such as in
case of currency exchange or for the making
the payments for services or goods

7. Concluding Remarks
This study conducts a comprehensive review of the various factors of the use of
Financial Technologies such as Blockchain, Cryptocurrencies in Islamic Finance.
Any innovation is welcome is Islam as long as it does not violate basic teachings of
the Quran and Sunnah. The prospect for Islamic Fintech is really bright in Islamic
world and among the Muslim users of financial services as it provides opportunities
for innovation and can provide financial services at affordable cost.
The use of FinTech in Islamic Finance or Islamic FinTech poses lot of challenges as
well as it explores numerous opportunities. Islamic FinTech can give a boost to

M.R. Rabbani, S. Khan, E.I. Thalassinos
79

startups as it is transparent, accessible and easy to use and can gain customer
confidence with an ease which is very important for the startups. FinTech solutions
are more cost-effective in providing the financial services as compare to traditional
finance and banking. Islamic FinTech will emerge as a lifeline for the Islamic
Finance and Banking institution because of its cost effectiveness and the reach to the
communities. Islamic FinTech can easily gain the confidence of Muslim
communities as well as the non-muslim communities primarily because of its
transparency. However, along with the great opportunities comes great challenges as
well, such as there is a lack good and authentic research in Islamic FinTech, lack of
trained human personnel, government and Shariah compliance trade-offs, cyberattacks and the confidence of the investors as Islamic FinTech is still in its infancy.
Regulatory framework is another important area for Islamic FinTech which has to be
regularized and overcome its flaws. As Islamic FinTech is still in its inception, there
are several regulatory challenges such as regulatory framework is still evolving and
are in conflict with some of the existing regulations. The regulatory bodies should
use relaxed, liberal and principal-based approaches in regulating the Fintech
organization.
As far as the Blockchain technology in Islamic FinTech is concerned, it gives a more
secured and innovative way of doing business. The transactions under Blockchain
are more transparent and visible to all the users. Also, Smart contracts can be a
useful mechanism in all financial transactions and the monitoring and regulation
process can be reduced to mere writing a smart contract. The Cryptocurrency has
been a revelation and Muslim countries seriously needs to have to more research and
must find ways to develop and a cryptocurrency fully compatible with the sharia
principle. As of now no Muslim country allow cryptocurrency for legal transactions.
References:
Abojeib, M., Habib, F. 2019. Blockchain for Islamic Social Responsibility Institutions,
FinTech as a Disruptive Technology for Financial Institutions. IGI Global, 221-240.
Abu-Bakar, N., Sofian, R., Kiyotaka, U. 2017. Cryptocurrency Framework Diagnostics from
Islamic Finance Perspective: A New Insight of Bitcoin System Transaction.
International Journal of Management Science and Business Administration, 4(1),
19-28.
Abu-Bakar, M.M. 2018. Shariah Analysis of Bitcoin, Cryptocurrency and Blockchain.
Ahmad, W.M.W., Marhaini, W. 2008. Some Issues of Gharar (Uncertainty) in Insurance.
Essential Readings in Islamic Finance.
Ahmat, N., Bashir, S. 2017. Central Bank Cryptocurrency: A Monetary Policy Perspective.
Bank Negara Malaysia, September.
Alam N., Gupta L., Zameni, A. 2019a. Fintech Regulation. In: Fintech and Islamic Finance,
137-158. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
Alam, N., Gupta, L., Zameni, A. 2019b. Challenges and Success Factors for Islamic Fintech.
In Fintech and Islamic Finance, 159-173. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
Alam, N., Gupta, L., Zameni, A. 2019c. Cryptocurrency and Islamic Finance. In Fintech and
Islamic Finance, 99-118. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.

FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance: An Extensive Literature Review
80
Alexandre, A. 2018. Stellar Becomes ‘First’ Shari’ah-Certified Blockchain for Payments and
Asset Tokenization. In the Cointelegraph, the Future of Money, 18.
Al-hussaini, A.I.S., Ibrahim, A.A., Fauzan, M. 2019. Users Perception of Cryptocurrency
System Application from the Islamic Views.
Alidin, A.A., Ali-Wosabi, A.A.A., Yusoff, Z. 2018. Overview of Blockchain Implementation
on Islamic Finance: Saadiqin Experience. Cyber Resilience Conference (CRC),
Putrajaya, Malaysia,1-2. doi: 10.1109/CR.2018.8626822.
Allison, I. 2015. If Banks Want Benefits of Blockchains, they Must Go Permissionless.
International Business Times.
Alt, R., Beck, R., Smits, M.T. 2018. FinTech and the transformation of the financial industry.
Electronic Markets, 28, 235-243. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-018-0310-9.
Alzubaidi, I.B., Abdullah, A. 2017. Developing a Digital Currency from an Islamic
Perspective: Case of Blockchain Technology. International Business Research, 10,
1-9.
Alzubaidi, I.B., Adam, A. 2017. Developing a Digital Currency from an Islamic Perspective:
Case of Blockchain Technology. International Business Research, 10(11).
Ameer, R. 2018. What Is Cryptocurrency: 21st-Century Unicorn – or the Money of the
Future? Blockgeeks.
Anagnostopoulos, Y. 2018. Fintech and Regtech: Impact on Regulators and Banks. Journal
of Economics and Business, 100(10). Doi:1016/j.jeconbus.2018.07.003.
Andy, G. 2011. Crypto Currency. Forbes. Retrieved 10 Feb 2020.
Anikina, I.D., Gukova, V.A., Golodova, A.A., Chekalkina, A.A. 2016. Methodological
Aspects of Prioritization of Financial Tools for Stimulation of Innovative Activities.
Anil, S.K., Alistair, M. 2019. FinTech and the future of financial services: What are the
research gaps? CAMA Working Papers, Centre for Applied Macroeconomic
Analysis, Crawford School of Public Policy, the Australian National University.
Arize, C.A., Andreopoulos-Campanelli, G., Kallianiotis, N.I., Malindretos, J. 2018. MNC
Transactions Foreign Exchange Exposure: An Application. International Journal of
Economics & Business Administration, 6(1), 54-60.
Armour, J., Awrey, D., Davies, P., Enriques, L., Gordon, J.N., Mayer, C., Payne, J. 2016.
Principles of Financial Regulation, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Arner, D.W., Barberis, J.N., Buckley, R.P. 2015. The Evolution of FinTech: A New PostCrisis Paradigm? University of Hong Kong, Faculty of Law Research Paper No.
2015/047; UNSW Law Research Paper No. 2016–62.
Arner, D.W., Barberis, J.N., Buckley, R.P. 2016. FinTech, RegTech and the
Reconceptualization of Financial Regulation. Northwestern Journal of International
Law & Business.
Asif, S. 2018. The Halal and Haram Aspects of Digital Currencies in Islam,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/326398987_The_Halal_and_Haram_Aspe
cts_of_DigitalCurrencies_in_Islam.
Bajakić, I. 2019. Financial Integration of the New Member States–Case Study of EU’s
Regulatory Initiative on Financial Technologies.
doi.org/10.31410/EMAN.2019.331.
Beik, I.S., Arsyianti, L.D. 2008. Why the rate of financing in Islamic Banks is high? An
analysis based on the Malaysian case. Tazkia Islamic Finance and Business Review,
3(1).
Bettinger, A. 1972. Fintech: A series of 40-time shared models used at manufacturers
Hanover trust company. Interfaces 62-63.
Biancone, P.P., Secinaro, S., Kamal, M. 2019. Crowdfunding and Fintech: business model

M.R. Rabbani, S. Khan, E.I. Thalassinos
81
sharia-compliant. European Journal of Islamic Finance, 12.
Billah, M.M. 2019. Islamic Cryptocurrency. Islamic Financial Products, 413-434.
Brian, Y. 2017. Fintech could be solution for regulatory challenges facing Shariah contracts.
International Financial Law Review. Available at:
https://search.proquest.com/openview/beff0318536ed68104ec4b7be68b10af/1?pqorigsite=gscholar&cbl=36341.
Bromberg, L.E., Godwin, A.J., Ramsay, I. 2017. Fintech Sandboxes: Achieving a Balance
between Regulation and Innovation. Journal of Banking and Finance Law and
Practice, 28(4), 314-336.
Carrick, J. 2016. Bitcoin as a Complement to Emerging Market Currencies. Emerging
Markets Finance and Trade, 52(10), 2321-2334.
Cattelan, V. 2009. From the concept of haqq to the prohibitions of ribā, gharar and maysir in
Islamic finance. Int. J. Monetary Economics and Finance, Vol. 2, Nos. ¾.
CGAP. 2018. RegTech and Digital Finance Supervision: A Leap into the Future. Available
at: https://www.cgap.org/blog/regtech-and-digital-finance-supervision-leap-future.
Chen, K. 2018. Financial Innovation and Technology Firms: A Smart New World with
Machines. In Banking and Finance Issues in Emerging Markets, 279-292.
Coates, R. 2015. Chinese Shadow Banking and the Rise of the Bank of Foxconn. Supply
China Management Review.
Collins, L., Baeck, P. 2015. Cryptocurrencies could bring cost-savings to crowdfunding and
make it easier to hold small stakes in companies, UK: NESTA, available from:
https://www.nesta.org.uk/blog/crowdfunding-and-cryptocurrencies/.
Cooper, T. 2018. The Race to Become the World’s Leading Leading Islamic Fintech Hub –
Raconteur. Racounter. At: https://www.raconteur.net/finance/race-become-worldsleading- leading-islamic-fintech-hub.
Cristea, M., Thalassinos, I.E. 2016. Private Pension Plans: An Important Component of the
Financial Market. International Journal of Economics and Business Administration
4(1), 110-115. DOI: 10.35808/ijeba/95.
Dapp, T.M. 2014. Fintech-The Digital ®evolution in the Financial Sector: Algorithm-based
Banking with the Human Touch.
Dorfleitner, G., Hornuf, L., Schmitt, M., Weber, M. 2017. Definition of FinTech and
description of the FinTech industry. In FinTech in Germany, 5-10, Springer, Cham.
Drasch, B., Schweizer, A., Urbach, N. 2018. Integrating the ‘Troublemakers’: A Taxonomy
for Cooperation between Banks and Fintechs. Journal of Economics and Business.
10.1016/j.jeconbus.2018.04.002.
El Amri, M.C., Mohammed, M.O. 2019. The Analysis of Cryptocurrency Based on Maqasid
al-Shari’ah. In Halal Cryptocurrency Management, 119-131. Palgrave Macmillan,
Cham.
Evans, C. 2015. Bitcoin in Islamic Banking and Finance. Journal of Islamic Banking and
Finance, 3(1), 1-11.
Fait, M. 2018. The Compatibility of Cryptocurrencies and Islamic Finance. European Journal
of Islamic Finance, 10.
Fanning, K., Centers, D.P. 2016. Blockchain and its Coming Impact on Financial Services.
Journal of Corporate Accounting & Finance, 27(5), 53-57. doi:10.1002/jcaf.22179.
FCA. 2019. RegTech Applies to New Technologies Developed to Help Overcome
Regulatory Challenges in Financial Services. At:
https://www.fca.org.uk/firms/regtech.
Fetai, B. 2015. Financial Integration and Financial Development: Does Financial Integration
Matter? European Research Studies Journal, 18(2), 97-106.

FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance: An Extensive Literature Review
82
Financial Market Authority. 2017. Regulatory Treatment of Initial Coin Offerings (ICOs).
(Accessed on 10-Feb-2020) Available at:
https://www.finma.ch/en/~/media/finma/dokumente/dokumentencenter/myfinma/4d
okumentation/finma-aufsichtsmitteilungen/20170929-finma-aufsichtsmitteilung-042017.pdf
FInnovasia. 2018. HongKong FInTech week 2017. Available at:
https://fintechnews.hk/2990/various/hong-kong-fintech-week-2017-day-4highlights/.
Firmansyah, E.A., Anwar, M. 2019. Islamic Financial Technology (Fintech): Its Challenges
and Prospect. Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research,
216. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330923829.
Firmansyah, H.B., Ahmad, L.R. 2018. The Role of Islamic Financial Technology (FinTech )
Start-up. In Improving Financial Inclusion in Indonesia Case. Angsur.
Folkinshteyn, D., Lennon, M.M., Reilly, T. 2015. The Bitcoin mirage: An oasis of financial
remittance. Journal of Strategic and International Studies, 10(2), 118-122.
Gassner, M., Lawrence, J. 2018. Fintech in Islamic Finance: Theory and Practice. Taylor and
Francis Group. USA.
Gomber, P., Kauffman, R.J., Parker, C., Weber, B.W. 2018. On the Fintech revolution:
interpreting the forces of innovation, disruption, and transformation in financial
services. Journal of Management Information Systems, 35(1), 220-265.
Gomber, P., Koch, J., Siering, M. 2017. Digital Finance and FinTech: current research and
future research directions. Journal of Business Economics, 87, 537-580.
Haddad, C., Hornuf, L. 2019. The emergence of the global fintech market: economic and
technological determinants. Small Bus Econ 53, 81-105.
Haqqi, A. 2018. Strengthening Islamic Finance in South East Asia through Innovation:
Islamic Fintech in Brunei Darussalam.
Hes, A., Jilkova, P. 2016. Position of Low-Cost Banks on the Financial Market in Czech
Republic. European Research Studies Journal, 19(4), 42-52.
Ibrahim, M.A., Fisol, W.N.M., Haji-Othman, Y. 2017. Customer intention on Islamic home
financing products: an application of the theory of planned behavior (TPB).
Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences, 8(2), 77-86.
IOSCO. 2017. IOSCO analyzes potential of tech-driven change in the securities market
industry. Available at: https://www.iosco.org/news/pdf/IOSCONEWS451.pdf.
Irfan, H., Ahmed, D. 2019. Fintech: The opportunity for Islamic finance. In Fintech in
Islamic Finance. Theory and Practice, 19-30. Routledge.
Jędrzejowska-Schiffauer, I., Schiffauer, P., Thalassinos, I.E. 2019. EU Regulatory Measures
Following the Crisis: What Impact on Corporate Governance of Financial
Institutions. European Research Studies Journal, 22(3), 432-456.
Khan, S.N., Rabbani, M.R. 2020. Artificial Intelligence and NLP based Chatbot as Islamic
Banking and Finance Expert. 2020 International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and Natural Language Processing (CLNLP 2020), Seoul, South Korea
on July 20-22.
Khan, S.N., Usman, I. 2019. A model for English to Urdu and Hindi machine translation
system using translation rules and artificial neural network. Int. Arab J. Inf.
Technol., 16(1), 125-131.
Khan, S.N., Mishra, R.B. 2011. Translation rules and ANN based model for English to Urdu
machine translation. INFOCOMP, 10(3), 36-47.
Khan, S.N., Mir, U., Shreem, S.S., Alamri, S. 2018. Translation Divergence Patterns

M.R. Rabbani, S. Khan, E.I. Thalassinos
83
Handling in English to Urdu Machine Translation. International Journal on Artificial
Intelligence Tools, 27(05), 1850017.
Lacasse, R.M., Lambert, B., Khan, N. 2017. Blockchain technology-Arsenal for a Shariahcompliant financial ecosystem. Journal of Business and Economics.
Lacasse, R.M., Lambert, B., Nida, K.H.A.N. 2018. Islamic Banking-Towards a Blockchain
Monitoring Process. Revue de Gestion et d’Économie, 6(1&2), 33-46.
Laldin, M.A. 2018. FinTech and Islamic Finance. IFN Islamic Finance News, 15, 67.
Lee, I., Shin, Y.J. 2018. Fintech: Ecosystem, business models, investment decisions, and
challenges. Business Horizons, 61(1), 35-46.
Loo, R.V. 2018. Making innovation more competitive: The case of Fintech. UCLA Law
Review, 65, 232.
MacDonagh, M. 2016. Artificial Intelligence Set to Transform Regulatory Compliance.
Banking Tech. Available at: https://www.bankingtech.com/2016/09/artificialintelligence-set-to-transform-regulatory-compliance/.
Meera, A. 2018. Cryptocurrencies from Islamic Perspectives: The Case of Bitcoin. Buletin
Ekonomi Moneter Dan Perbankan, 20(4), 475-492.
Milian, E., Spinola, M., Carvalho, M. 2019. Fintechs: A Literature Review and Research
Agenda. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 34, 100833.
10.1016/j.elerap.2019.100833.
Michalopoulos, G., Tsermenidis, K. 2018. Country Risk on the Bank Borrowing Cost
Dispersion Within the Euro Area during the Financial and Debt Crises. International
Journal of Economics and Business Administration, 6(4), 76-92.
Miskam, S., Shahwahid, F.M., Sholehuddin, N.B. 2018. Catching the Fintech Wave in
Islamic Finance: Regulatory Approach for Malaysia. 4th Muzakarah Fiqh &
International Fiqh Conference (MFIFC 2018).
Miskam, S., Yaacob, A., Rosman, R. 2019. Fintech and Its Impact on Islamic Fund
Management in Malaysia: A Legal Viewpoint. Oseni, U., Hassan, M. and Hassan,
R. (Ed.) Emerging Issues in Islamic Finance Law and Practice in Malaysia, Emerald
Publishing Limited, 223-246. https://doi.org/10.1108/978-1-78973-545-120191019.
Mohamed, H., Ali, H. 2018. Blockchain, Fintech, and Islamic Finance: Building the Future
in the New Islamic Digital Economy: Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG.
Muneeza, A., Arshad, N.A., Arifin, A.T. 2018. The Application of Blockchain Technology in
Crowdfunding: Towards Financial Inclusion via Technology. International Journal
of Management and Applied Research, 5(2), 82-98.
Nakamoto, S. 2008. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. bitcoin.org.
Natoor, B. 2019. Islamic FinTech faces regulatory hurdles, Fitch Ratings says. Available at:
https://ibsintelligence.com/ibs-journal/ibs-news/islamic-fintech-fitch/.
Niforos, M., Ramachandran, V., Rehermann, T. 2017. Block Chain: Opportunities for Private
Enterprises in Emerging Market. Washington, D.C., International Finance
Corporation, available at
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/28962.
Noordin, K.A. 2018. Islamic Finance: Is Cryptocurrency halal? The Edge, Malaysia.
Othman, A., Alhabshi, S., Kassim, S., Sharofiddin, A. 2019. The impact of cryptocurrencies
market development on banks’ deposits variability in the GCC region. Journal of
Financial Economic Policy. At: https://doi.org/10.1108/JFEP-02-2019-0036.
Oxford Dictionary. http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/it/definizione/inglese/fintech.
Oziev, G., Yandiev, M. 2017. Cryptocurrency from Shari’ah Perspective. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3101981 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3101981.

FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance: An Extensive Literature Review
84
Oziev, G., Magomet, Y. 2018. Cryptocurrency from a Shari’ah Perspective. Al-Shajarah:
Journal of the International Institute of Islamic Thought and Civilization (ISTAC)
23(2), 315-338.
https://journals.iium.edu.my/shajarah/index.php/shaj/article/view/748.
Polansek, T. 2016. CME, ICE prepare pricing data that could boost bitcoin. Reuters.
PWC. 2019. Pwc Global FinTech Survey 2019. Available on:
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/industries/financial-services/fintech-survey/blurredlines.html.
Rabbani, M.R. 2020a. Financial Literacy Among the Private University Students in Kingdom
of Bahrain. International Journal of Scientific and Technology Research, 9(3).
Rabbani, M.R., Qadri, F.A., Ishfaq, M. 2016. Service Quality, Customer Satisfaction and
Customer Loyalty: An Empirical Study on Banks in India. VFAST Transactions on
Education and Social Sciences, 11(2), 1-9.
Rabbani, M.R., Shahnawaz, A.J., Rahiman, H. 2020b. Analysis of Critical Barriers to
Women Entrepreneurship in Bahrain: An Exploratory study. International Journal of
Scientific and Technology Research, Vo. 9, Issue 3.
Romanova, I., Kudinska, M. 2017. Banking & Fintech: A Challenge or Opportunity.
Contemporary Studies in Economic and Financial Analysis, 21-35.
Rupeika-Apoga, R., Zaidi, H.S., Thalassinos, E.Y., Thalassinos, I.E. 2018. Bank Stability:
The Case of Nordic and Non-Nordic Banks in Latvia. International Journal of
Economics and Business Administration, 6(2), 39-55, DOI: 10.35808/ijeba/156.
Rusydiana, S.A. 2018. Developing Islamic Financial Technology in Indonesia. Hasanuddin
Economics and Business Review, Vol. 2, No. 2, 143-152.
Saad, M.A., Fisol, W.N., Bin, M. 2019. Financial Technology (Fintech) Services in Islamic
Financial Institutions. In International Postgraduate Conference 1–10.
Saadiqin. 2020. http://www.saadiqin.com/.
Saba, I., Rehana, K., Imran, S.C. 2019. FinTech and Islamic Finance-Challenges and
Opportunities. Review of Economics and Development Studies, Volume 5, No. 4.
Saksonova, S., Kuzmina-Merlino, I. 2017. Fintech as Financial Innovation-The Possibilities
and Problems of Implementation. European Research Studies Journal, 20(3A), 961973.
Sangwan, V.H., Prakash, P., Singh, S. 2019. Financial technology: a review of extant
literature. Studies in Economics and Finance. https://doi.org/10.1108/SEF-07-20190270.
Sanicola, L. 2019. What is FinTech? Huffington Post. Available online:
https://www.huffpost.com/entry/what-isfintech_b_58a20d80e4b0cd37efcfebaa.
Satyawati, I., Suroso, S., Suryanto, T., Nurjannah, S.D. 2017. Does Financial Performance of
Islamic Banking is better? Panel Data Estimation. European Research Studies
Journal, 20(2A), 592-606.
Schindler, J. 2017. FinTech and Financial Innovation: Drivers and Depth. Finance and
Economics Discussion Series. Doi: 10.17016/FEDS.2017.081.
Schueffel, P. 2016. Taming the beast: A scientific definition of fintech. Journal of Innovation
Management, 4, 32-54. doi: 10.24840/2183-0606_004.004_0004.
Schwarcz, S.L. 2013. Regulating Shadows: Financial Regulation and Responsibility Failure.
Lee Law Review, 1781-1825.
Shahnawaz, Thirunavukkarasu, K. 2019. Indexing Issues in Spatial Big Data Management.
International Conference on Advances in Engineering Science Management &
Technology. Uttaranchal University, Dehradun, India, 14th - 15th March.
Shahnawaz, Astya, P. 2017. Sentiment analysis: Approaches and open issues. International

M.R. Rabbani, S. Khan, E.I. Thalassinos
85
Conference on Computing, Communication and Automation (ICCCA).
doi:10.1109/ccaa.2017.8229791
Shahnawaz, Mishra, R.B. 2013a. Rule-based approach for handling of case markers in
English to Urdu/Hindi translation. International Journal of Knowledge Engineering
and Soft Data Paradigms, 4(2), 138-165. Inderscience Publishers,
DOI:10.1504/IJKESDP.2013.058128
Shahnawaz, Mishra, R.B. 2013b. Statistical machine translation system for English to Urdu.
International Journal of Advanced Intelligence Paradigms, 5(3), 182-203.
Inderscience Publishers, DOI: 10.1504/IJAIP.2013.056421
Shahnawaz, Mishra, R.B. 2015. An English to Urdu translation model based on CBR, ANN
and translation rules. International Journal of Advanced Intelligence Paradigms,
7(1), 1-23.
Shahnawaz, M.R. 2011. ANN and rule-based model for English to Urdu-Hindi machine
translation system. In Proceedings of National Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and agents: Theory& Application, AIAIATA 2011, 115-121.
Siswantoro, D., Handika, R., Mita, A.F. 2020. The requirements of cryptocurrency for
money, an Islamic view. Heliyon, 6(1), e03235.
Skan, J., Lumb, R., Masood, S., Conway, S.K. 2014. The boom in global Fintech investment:
A new growth opportunity for London. Retrieved from
https://www.cbinsights.com/research-reports/Boom-in-Global-FinTechInvestment.pdf.
Thalassinos, I.E., Thalassinos, Y. 2018. Financial Crises and e-Commerce: How Are They
Related. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3330169.
Thalassinos, I.E., Pintea, M., Raţiu, I.P. 2015a. The Recent Financial Crisis and Its Impact on
the Performance Indicators of Selected Countries during the Crisis Period: A Reply.
International Journal of Economics and Business Administration, 3(1), 3-20.
Thalassinos, I.E., Stamatopoulos, D.T. and Thalassinos, E.P. 2015b. The European Sovereign
Debt Crisis and the Role of Credit Swaps. Chapter book in The WSPC Handbook
of Futures Markets (eds) W. T. Ziemba and A.G. Malliaris, in memory of Late
Milton Miller (Nobel 1990), 605-639. DOI: 10.1142/9789814566926_0020.
Thalassinos, I.E., Liapis, K. and Thalassinos, E.J. 2014. The role of the rating companies in
the recent financial crisis in the Balkan and black sea area. Chapter book in
Economic Crisis in Europe and the Balkans, 79-115, Contributions to Economics,
Springer International Publishing, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-00494-5_6.
Thalassinos, I.E., Deceanu, L., Pintea, M. 2010. New Dimensions of Country Risk in the
Context of the Current Crisis: A Case Study for Romania and Greece. European
Research Studies Journal, 13(3), 225-236.
Thalassinos, I.E. 2008. Trends and Developments in the European Financial Sector.
European Financial and Accounting Journal, 3(3), 44-61.
Thalassinos, I,E., Thalassinos, E.P. 2006. Stock Markets' Integration Analysis. European
Research Studies Journal, 9(3-4), 3-14.
Tornjanski, V., Marinković, S., Săvoiu, G., Čudanov, M. 2015. A Need for Research Focus
Shift: Banking Industry in the Age of Digital Disruption. Econophysics,
Sociophysics & other Multidisciplinary Sciences Journal, 5(3), 11-15.
Treleaven, P. 2015. Financial Regulation of Fintech. Journal of Financial Perspectives, 3(3).
Tsai, C.H., Peng, K.J. 2017. The FinTech Revolution and Financial Regulation: The Case of
Online Supply-Chain Financing. Published online by Cambridge University Press.
Tsai, Chang-Hsien. 2016. Legal Transplantation or Legal Innovation? Equity Crowdfunding

FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance: An Extensive Literature Review
86
Regulation in Taiwan after Title III of the U.S. Jobs Act. Boston University
International Law Journal 233-277.
Wijayanti, D.M., Pradipta, H. 2017. Sharia FinTech: Positive Innovation in Consumer
Perspective. Paper presented at the International Seminar Academic Network on
Competition Policy, Bali.
Wintermeyer, L. 2017. The Future of Islamic FinTech is Bright.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/lawrencewintermeyer/2017/12/08/the-future-ofislamic-fintech-is-bright/#684952e465fa.
Wintermeyer, L., Abdul, Haseeb Basit. 2017. The Future of Islamic FinTech Is Bright.
Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/lawrencewintermeyer/2017/12/08/the-futureof-islamic-fintech-is-bright/#47e1b19a65fa.
Wonglimpiyarat, J. 2017. FinTech banking industry: a systemic approach. Foresight, Vol. 19,
No. 6, 590-603. https://doi.org/10.1108/FS-07-2017-0026.
Yakubowski, M. 2019. Could Crypto be Compliant with Sharia Law? Avaialble at
https://cointelegraph.com/news/could-crypto-be-compliant-with-sharia-law-expertsanswer.
Zahudi, Z.M., Amir, R.A.T.R. 2016. Regulation of Virtual Currencies: Mitigating the Risks
and Challenges Involved. Journal of Islamic Finance, 5(1), 63-73.
Zhu, Z., Zhou, Z.Z. 2016. Analysis and outlook of applications of blockchain technology to
equity crowdfunding in China. Financial Innovation, Vol. 2, No. 1, 29-36.

