TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
TAFHIM: IKIM Journal of Introducing
Islam and the
Contemporary
World 15 No. 1 (June 2022): 51–68
Maqāsidic
Framework

Introducing
Maqāsidic Framework for
Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC)
Mohd Noor bin Omar[
mnoor@ikim.gov.my
Abstract
Money is a social convention performing its functions
to facilitate the socio-economic ecosystem. For
decades, money has evolved from barter, rare piece,
metal, fiat and presently a distributed blockchainbased digital money. Monetary authorities around
the world are expected to advance their own
national Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC)
that works effectively and efficiently. Several studies
have investigated the technical, economic and
feasibility of CBDC that might have an impact on
monetary policy and liquidity. This study employs
the maqāṣid al-sharī‘ah framework to investigate an
ethical dimension of CBDC and lay out an Islamic
principal guideline. The findings introduce an
ethical ecosystem useful to signify the viability type
of CBDC with specific characteristics and features.
This is also possible in modelling the compliance
aspects of digital monetary system to the Islamic
monetary framework.
[

Fellow at the Centre for the Study of Shariah, Law and Politics, Institute
of Islamic Understanding Malaysia (IKIM).

51

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Mohd Noor bin Omar/ TAFHIM 15 No. 1 (June 2022): 51–68

Keywords
Digital currency, central bank, maqāṣid al-sharī‘ah,
monetary system.

Introduction

M

oney is an integral part of socio-economic ecosystem.
A central bank is accorded the authority to manage
a country’s monetary policies to ensure economic growth,
financial stability, and settlement. The progression of technology
innovates the forms of money from metal to fiat, and currently
into a digital form. Digital money, be it representing fiat-based
currency or cryptographic digital token, is meant to facilitate
the functions of money as a medium of exchange, a store of
value and a unit of measurement. The interest in cryptocurrency
is further intensified by the growing distrust in fiat money
which is predicated on a lending/debt base, whereas digital
currency is asset or security based.1 Moreover, cryptographic
and blockchain-based digital token issued by an anonymous
private body enables peer-to-peer exchange in prevaricating
traditional central clearinghouses. This represents not only
a threat to the central bank or monetary authority, but also
its potential to disrupt the whole financial system as well as
challenge the traditional business model. In addition, this poses
a challenge for the role of a central bank in maintaining stability,
efficiency, and confidence in the financial ecosystem. Monetary
authorities are exploring the possibility of digital currency to
supersede both existing fiat-based money and privately issued
distributed block chain-based digital money. The rapid evolution
of the digital currency and its associated mechanism creates a
financial landscape for the people, government and monetary
authorities to review, rethink and reform the digital financial
system. Thus, central banks around the world are considering
1.

Sheila Ainon Yussof and Abdullah Al-Harthy, “Cryptocurrency
as an Alternative Currency in Malaysia : Issues and Challenges,”
Islam and Civilisational Renewal 9, no. 1 (2018): 48–65, https://doi.
org/10.12816/0049515.

52

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Introducing Maqāsidic Framework

a self-governing central bank digital currency (CBDC). It is
a new kind of digital money that could reform all aspects of
the financial system and, at the same time, fulfil the function
of money effectively and efficiently. While several studies have
investigated the technical, economic and feasibility of CBDC,
this article intends to focus on its ethical aspect. Ultimately, the
monetary authorities must ensure that all aspects of CBDC are
compliant, not only to the regulatory, economic stability and
growth, but also the shari‘ah injunctions. The Islamic financial
system with the Islamic guiding principles has the potential to
become one of the best practises of social and ethical finance.
The objective of this article is to observe the fundamental
principles of Islamic ethics in the application of CBDC by
employing the maqāṣid al-sharī‘ah framework. It is important to
ensure that the innovation of CBDC be aligned with the higher
objective of the sharī‘ah as a way of fulfilling the requirement
of Islam and ensuring benefits and justice to all humankind.
The conventional practice of finance has been argued to lack
Islamic injunctions due to alleged practices of implied Islamic
prohibition such as opening a backdoor to riba.2 The initiative
to analyse CBDC based on maqāṣid al-sharī‘ah framework is to
identify potential mafsadah (mischief), particularly on the issue
pertaining to the principles of jurisprudence, and ethics. In
doing so, this article will omit selected technological possibilities
and focus only on the characteristics and features of CBDC.
In addition, this article will open up the opportunity to revisit
and realise the concept of money from an Islamic perspective.
Money from the Islamic perspective

Islam recognises money as a medium of exchange and a unit
of measurement. Imam al-Ghazālī rejects money as a store of
value by comparing it to a ruler who cannot be imprisoned,
otherwise it will deprive society of its benefits and those who
2.

Imran Ismail, “Legal Stratagems (Hiyal) and Usury in Islamic Commercial
Law” (Phd. diss.,University of Birmingham, 2010).

53

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Mohd Noor bin Omar/ TAFHIM 15 No. 1 (June 2022): 51–68

hoard dirhams and dinars will be considered as transgressors.3
Money was invented to fulfil socio-economic needs. Advancement
in business dealings has forced money to evolve from its original
basic item and kind to a sophisticated contemporary application
such as the digital token. Throughout history until today, money
has never ceased to transform significantly from barter, rare
items, metal, paper and recently, in digital form.
Money should not be an objective in itself, but rather a
means to realise certain proceeds as it has no intrinsic utility.4
Money also cannot be considered as a commodity to enable trade
because it is simply a temporary intermediary and instrument
for transactions. If profit-making is the motive of exchange,
money should be integrated into a capital by legal obligation
in a sales contract, for instance, to enable it to be interchanged
with a commodity or asset.5
The Rise of Cryptocurrencies

Online transactions using digital platforms have the prospective
to become widely accepted for payments and settlements. Such
a trend has caused rather grave concern in recent years. During
the COVID-19 pandemic, digital currencies are perceived to
be useful for online settlements and many providers have been
in the race of offering digital banking and wallet. In Malaysia,
the online fiat-based money transaction operates on Real Time
Electronics Transfer of Funds and Securities (RENTAS). The
purpose of RENTAS is to enable overall efficiency of payment
system-Interbank Funds Transfer System (IFTS) and Scripless
Securities Transfer System (SSTS). Bank Negara Malaysia
is collaborating with the Hong Kong Monetary Authority
3.
4.
5.

Abdul Azim Islahi, “An Analytical Study of Al-Ghazali’s Thought on
Money and Interest,” in The International Conference on Al-Gazali’s Legacy: Its
Contemporary Relevance (Kuala Lumpur: International Institute of Islamic
Thought and Civilization, 2001).
Muhammad Taqi Usmani, “Post-Crisis Reforms: Some Points to Ponder,”
Iraj Toutounchian, “Integrating Money in Capital Theory: A Legal
Perspective (Islamic Finance),” … for Islamic Economics and the Islamic …,
2006, 75–113.

54

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Introducing Maqāsidic Framework

for Payment versus Payments (PvP) infrastructure of settling
interbank ringgit-US dollar trade launched the Renminbi (RMB)
settlements to support cross-border payments and settlements,
the onshore multi-currency funds.
Thus, a reconsideration of prevailing monetary system
to encompass digital currency equipped with vigorous security
qualities is the solution. Monetary authorities have been
responsive in addressing the importance of legislation for
the digital money’s connections, closely observing evolutions
in digital currencies and assessing their propositions for the
economy, the financial system and central banks. The monetary
authority in the digital monetary system plays a significant role
in classifying and deliberating any potential risks posed by digital
currencies and provides possible regulatory responses. Such a
set of regulatory standards could also set out frameworks for
cross-country collaboration and organisation in areas such as
information sharing and the exploration and tribunal of crossborder transgressions.
The innovation of cryptocurrency is considered to be
a financial disruption to the conventional monetary system.
Cryptocurrency comes as part and parcel of the financial
technology (fintech) revolution and digital wave. Cryptocurrency
is virtual or digital in nature, takes the form of tokens or coins
and is almost entirely intangible. The word crypto simply refers
to the complicated cryptography that allows for the creation and
processing of digital tokens or coins across decentralised systems.
Cryptocurrencies are designed to be free from government
intervention and contro. It is a type of unregulated digital money
which is issued and controlled by its developers and being used
and accepted among members of a specific virtual community.
It is also a form of digital currency that uses cryptographic
algorithms to ensure digital money supply as well as virtual
security and control platforms.6
6.

O. S. Bolotaeva, A. A. Stepanova, and S. S. Alekseeva, “The Legal
Nature of Cryptocurrency,” IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental
Science 272, no. 3 (2019).

55

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Mohd Noor bin Omar/ TAFHIM 15 No. 1 (June 2022): 51–68

The growth of effective regulatory reactions to the digital
currency is still in its primary phase. Digital currency is hard to be
regulated as it cuts across the responsibilities of multiple agencies
at both the national or international levels. Many are operating
privately and beyond the jurisdiction of the conventional system.
The digital monetary system poses a dilemma to the monetary
authority of a country which is whether to let it be on full control
of distributed ledger or with full control by private entity and
without governance by monetary authority. If it is not tied to a
country’s authority interventions, manipulation by an anonymous
autonomy is at stake. The legitimacy of the digital currency
considerably varies from country to country. A few countries,
such as Japan, have expressly permitted their utilisation and
exchange, while others, for instance, the People’s Republic of
China have prohibited or regulated cryptocurrencies. In the
case of Malaysia, a guideline has been issued under the Digital
Currency (Sector 6) of Anti-Money Laundering, Counter
Financing of Terrorism-AML/CFT as an initial response.7 The
issues which concern economists, scholars and jurists are the
question of sovereignty, compatibility and compliance to the
national security and financial domain. The digital currency
would need to convince users, stakeholders and countries of
its value while offering better and more convenient payment
solutions. The rise of digital transaction and the decline in cash
payments are among the motives for the introduction of a new
genus of money.
Central Bank Digital Currency

The Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) is a digital form of
currency that is backed by a central bank and has legal tender
recognition by law as a means to settle debts or meet financial
7.

Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM), “Anti-Money Laundering and Counter
Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) – Digital Currencies (Sector 6),”
no. Sector 6 (2018).

56

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Introducing Maqāsidic Framework

obligations such as tax payments, while at the same time, the
central bank would have direct excess to apply its monetary policy.
The cryptographic digital currency is a unit of asset
or security which is privately issued in the form of a digital
unit on the Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) platform.8
It is purely issued from a block of a particular recorded data
chain. The digital token or asset of cryptocurrency coin is,
however, not a currency. In fact, it is a record of unit holder
ownership right encrypted in digital cryptographic data. It
is transferable in a transaction as a medium of exchange9
and secure to be transferred via online transaction using the
blockchain technology engaging peer-to-peer cloud networking
with public and private key.10 Blockchain is a digital ledger
system of transaction recording information in a way to make it
chained with each block of information that is impossible to be
manipulated, hacked or changed. Bitcoin (BTC), for example,
was the first successful cryptocurrency ever existed and invented
based on a published whitepaper by Satoshi Nakamoto entitled
“Bitcoin: A Peer-to-peer Electronic Cash System”. Primarily,
the unique characteristic of Bitcoin is that it is a decentralised
cryptocurrency, peer-to-peer direct transfer, secure and on
distributed network as an intermediary for verification and proof
of stake.11 Gradually, the BTC digital token gains a recognition
8.

Richard Adams et al., “The Future of Money and Further Applications
of the Blockchain Proposal,” Strategic Change 26, no. 5 (September 1,
2017): 417–22, https://doi.org/10.1002/jsc.2141.
9. Nashirah Abu Bakar, Sofian Rosbi, and Kiyotaka Uzaki, “Cryptocurrency
Framework Diagnostics from Islamic Finance Perspective: A New Insight of
Bitcoin System Transaction,” International Journal of Management Science and
Business Administration 4, no. 1 (2017): 19–28, https://doi.org/10.18775/
ijmsba.1849-5664-5419.2014.41.1003.
10. Ahmed Kosba et al., “Hawk: The Blockchain Model of Cryptography
and Privacy-Preserving Smart Contracts,” Proceedings - 2016 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP 2016, 2016, 839–58, https://doi.
org/10.1109/SP.2016.55.
11. Satoshi Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System,”
Www.Bitcoin.Org, 2008, 9, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10838-008-9062-0.

57

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Mohd Noor bin Omar/ TAFHIM 15 No. 1 (June 2022): 51–68

forming the market capitalisation of USD886.27 billion.12 There
are approximately 11,879 cryptocurrencies and digital tokens
with market capitalisation of more than US$2.12 trillion in
existence, differing in name, structure, and features.13
There are multiple cryptocurrency platforms available
in the market. Proof of Work (PoW) makes use of the concept
of the same name to process transactions in a blockchain, i.e.,
a distributed ledger system on network shared among every
participating computer (called nodes). On the other hand, Proof
of Stake (PoS) is a smaller pool of nodes to validate transactions
that PoW could not do. Any nodes that try to cheat automatically
forfeit their stake as a penalty. Another platform offering is
the token. Tokens are distinct from the traditional blockchain
stand-alone systems. Finally, stablecoins is a cryptocurrency
created for the sole purpose of providing reliable value digital
storage. Stablecoins represents something of a hybrid (either
backed by multiple or single commodity, fiat or crypto) between
tokens and standard cryptocurrencies or collateralised such as
Thether (USDT), True USD (TUSD), Paxos Standard (PAX),
and Binance USD (BUSD). They are built on existing blockchain
but may be exchanged for fiat currency. It is the most reliable
cryptocurrency for CBDC to peg on. Be it on any platform, the
cryptocurrency is a secure digital system that can transmit value.

12. Data from CoinMarketCap, the world’s most-referenced price-tracking
website for cryptoassets in the rapidly growing cryptocurrency space.
Accessed on 15 September 2021. www.coinmarketcap.com.
13. Ibid.

58

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Introducing Maqāsidic Framework

Table 1: The Venn-diagram on Taxonomy of Money
(Source: World Economic Forum 2019)14

In summary, the Bank of International Settlements (BIS)
has developed a taxonomy of money in Table 1, to classify money:
Issuer (central bank or other), form (electronic or physical),
accessibility (universal or limited) and transfer mechanism
(centralised or peer-to-peer), while blockchain technology creates
a new outlook to efficiency, resiliency and security for digital
token. Many studies have been conducted on matters relating to
blockchain and digital currencies. The research on blockchain
applications within the Islamic monetary system is specifically
on the potential of digital currency as a better alternative to
fiat and paper monetary system.15
14. Ashley (World Economic Forum) Lannquist, “Central Banks and Distributed
Ledger Technology: How Are Central Banks Exploring Blockchain
Today?,” World Economic Forum, 2019.
15. Ibrahim Bassam Zubaidi and Adam Abdullah, “Developing a Digital
Currency from an Islamic Perspective: Case of Blockchain Technology,”
International Business Research 10, no. 11 (September 29, 2017): 79, https://
doi.org/10.5539/ibr.v10n11p79.

59

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Mohd Noor bin Omar/ TAFHIM 15 No. 1 (June 2022): 51–68

The blockchain-based digital currency is expanding in
place of the current fiat-based system, thus, disrupting the
existing monetary system and structure. The growth of its market
capitalisation has increased tremendously since its inception and
has alarmed the monetary authority, such as the central bank, to
devise regulatory mechanisms. In the World Economic Forum
2019, a special focus was given to the research, experimentation
and early implementations of CBDC with various use cases
of distributed ledger technology and a groundwork for the
introduction of CBDC.16 One key issue for such monetary
authorities as the central bank is whether or not to release its
own digital currency that can be used by the general public to
make payments. Fung and Halaburda suggest an outline to
evaluate why a central bank should consider supplying a digital
currency and how to implement it to improve the efficiency of
the retail payment system.17 Indeed, many papers which have
been published to that effect have proposed variable types and
platforms in offering CBDC in line with the aspiration. To
date, monetary authorities of countries such as China, Senegal,
Singapore, Tunisia, Estonia, Japan, Russia, Sweden and Palestine
are testing the issuance and uses of CBDC.
According to a paper published by the Committee on
Payments and Market Infrastructures, Bank for International
Settlements (BIS), CBDC could replace fiat-based currency
and function as a medium of exchange, a store of value, and
a unit of account for internal and international operations.18
Among the central banks that took the project into the pipeline
are the Bank of England, Central Bank of Sweden, Uruguay,
Singapore (project name UBIN), India, Canada (Jasper), Russia
(Oleg Fomichev), Switzerland (e-Swiss Franc), Marshall Island,
China, Estonia, Iran, Canada, USA, and Venezuela (Petro). In
16. Lannquist, “Central Banks and Distributed Ledger Technology: How
Are Central Banks Exploring Blockchain Today?”
17. Ben S. C. Fung and Hanna Halaburda, “Central Bank Digital Currencies:
A Framework for Assessing Why and How,” SSRN Electronic Journal, no.
22 (2016): 1–27, https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.26985.70243.
18. CPMI, “Central Bank Digital Currencies,” 2018.

60

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Introducing Maqāsidic Framework

fact, following that, a working paper published by the staff of
Bank of England has proposed three models of CBDC that
have the potentials to be implemented.19
Efforts put in by the Atlantic Council shows the real time
CBDC Tracker updating developments to date are shown in
Table 2. The monetary authorities of countries such as China,
Senegal, Singapore, Tunisia, Estonia, Japan, Russia, Sweden
and Palestine are testing the issuance and uses of CBDC.

Table 2: CBDC Tracker on the World Map
(Source: Atlantic Council January 2022)20

Islamic View on the Digital Currency

The aim of the Shariah can be summed up as in the following,
“the obtainment of benefits (maslaḥah) and the avoidance of
harms (mafsadah)”.21 In the financial realisation, the Shariah
19. Michael Kumhof and Clare Noone, “Central Bank Digital Currencies
— Design Principles and Balance Sheet Implications,” 2018.
20. Figure from the Atlantic Council-a nonpartisan organisation to shape
solutions to global challenges. Accessed on January 16, 2022. www.
cbdctracker.org.
21. Ahmad Al-Raysuni, Imam Al-Shatibi’s Theory of the Hihger Objectives and
Intents of Islamic Law, The International Institute of Islamic Thought 22 (2013)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13398-014-0173-7.2.

61

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Mohd Noor bin Omar/ TAFHIM 15 No. 1 (June 2022): 51–68

seeks to dispense with all types of monetary improprieties,
poverty, unemployment, and underemployment among people
and monetary accessibility for the public to achieve prosperous
living. It is to safeguard and prevent any type of deception,
misrepresentation and injustice in financial dealings.
The Shariah supports real economic activity and mutual
agreement in trade so as to empower a person to gain a living
appropriately, and it takes expansive measures to guarantee the
smooth running of business exchanges in commerce. The Shariah
has allowed every genuine mechanism and procedures that are
required for development and enhanced success to individuals.
Any abusive activities that can obstruct humans to thrive are
unlawful. For example, interest (ribā) and gambling, both endorse
some financial dues at the expense of individuals. 22 Monetary
advancement with respect to law and fair procedures in managing
financial and asset is essential for the improvement of human life
is basically connected to the maqāsid. The goals (maqāsid) of the
Islamic monetary application are as follows: a) financial prosperity
within the framework of the ethical standards; b) fraternity
and equity inclusion; c) just and fair; and d) flexibility, equality
and social welfare.23 The objectives of the Islamic monetary
framework are equity and value; arrangement of the financial
needs of the people or financial wellbeing; improvement of the
people’s monetary assets or financial development; and change
in the social milieu of the community.
Given its vital association with all the Islamic sciences,
the concept of maqāṣid al-sharī‘ah has turned into an authentic
structure for creating theories, models, approaches and plans
of change in different parts of life. Financial improvement
particularly Islamic finance has likewise gotten some maqāsidbased intercessions as of late, a standout amongst the most
22. Asifa Quraishi and Mohammad Hashim Kamali, “Principles of Islamic
Jurisprudence,” Journal of Law and Religion 15, no. 1/2 (2000): 385.
23. Fazlur Rahman Faridi, “Theory of Fiscal Policy in an Islamic State,”
Journal of King Abdulaziz University: Islamic Economics 1, no. 1 (1983):
15–30.

62

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Introducing Maqāsidic Framework

imperative of this being Chapra’s (2008) work. Two essential
inquiries should be tended to with respect to the implications of
the maqāṣid on CBDC issues: first, what part can maqāṣid play a
role in understanding financial issues, breaking down financial
marvels and figuring financial strategies?; and second, what
significance does the concept of maqāṣid have in the investigation
of financial advancement from the Islamic point of view?
There are different motivations to uphold that the maqāṣid
al-sharī‘ah are vital to all financial examination, as they identify
with the subject of deprivation, possessions transference and
monetary improvement. As observed, in every one of the
discourses concerning the maqāṣid al-sharī‘ah, researchers, scholars
and jurists, from the time of al-Juwaini (476 AH) and followed
by al-Ghazali (d.505 AH), had been consistent in upholding
that safeguarding and distribution of possessions as among the
major goals of the Shariah.
Ultimately, the real Islamic banking and finance is an
institution that is unable to sell money for money with interest as
the price. CBDC is totally new and the digital financial ecosystem
could be the answer to the above conundrum. Crafting a new
digital system for the central bank with new governing policies
and instrument fulfils the Islamic teaching.
Conceptual Application

The principles of the maqasid al-shariah could be applied on
the CBDC and digital financial ecosystem on every stage from
introduction, implementation and implication. In other words,
evaluation based on the maqasid al-shariah is to be made on the
foundation, theory, structure and application of CBDC. The
first stage of evaluation on the maqāsidic framework is by tracing
the existence of the following ethical elements of shariah in the
digital currency bank:
1.
2.

Protect public interest;
Protect seigniorage of ownership and right to earn income;

63

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Mohd Noor bin Omar/ TAFHIM 15 No. 1 (June 2022): 51–68

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Security consideration and payment system;
Financial stability and eliminating speculative activities;
Policy governance and instrument implementation;
Technological and service efficiency; and,
Equal wealth distribution and financial inclusion.

Public
Interest
Protection
Equal
Distribution

Ownership
Seignories

Ethical
Ecosphere

Security
consideration

Policy
Governance
Financial
Stability

Table 3: Ethical Elements of Maqasid Al-Shariah Framework
(Source: Author’s illustration)

Having the indicators will help us to investigate how
CBDC plays its role in the ethical perspective in the new era of
digital economy. The existence of those maqasidic elements in
the CBDC would serve as indicators on the Shariah-compliant
ethical ecosphere dimension of CBDC. The maqasidic elements
should be consistently present throughout the whole processes

64

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Introducing Maqāsidic Framework

of CBDC, rather than in one or two certain processes only. As
the process of developing the digital currency is still in progress,
the findings of the elements are juxtaposed with every type of
digital currency such as crypto-based, fiat-based, be it blockchain
or stablecoin as the CBDC.
Ethical Ecosphere

Introduction Implementation Implication

RAM
Decision*

Protecting
public interest

Y/N

Y/N

Y/N

Y/N

Ownership
Seignories

Y/N

Y/N

Y/N

Y/N

Policy governance

Y/N

Y/N

Y/N

Y/N

Financial
stability

Y/N

Y/N

Y/N

Y/N

Technological
efficiency

Y/N

Y/N

Y/N

Y/N

Equal wealth
distribution

Y/N

Y/N

Y/N

Y/N

%

%

%

Y/N

Maqasidic
Framework
Decision

Table 4: Ethical Ecosphere Checklist of CBDC
*RAM =Rational Actor Model
(Source: Author’s illustration)

Conclusion

The introduction of CBDC will change the role of central bank
money, the scope of direct access to central bank accountabilities,
and the construction of financial intermediation. There are
various forms and design choices for digital currency that carry

65

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Mohd Noor bin Omar/ TAFHIM 15 No. 1 (June 2022): 51–68

diverse inferences for policy transmission, payment systems, and
the new digital financial ecosystem. Our findings have pointed
to the ethical aspect of digital currency solely based on the
intent and intensity of the Shariah. The structured framework,
that is, the ethical elements cover all important aspects of the
maqāṣid al-sharī‘ah such as justice, equal rights concerning people,
institutional, technological, administrative, and legal aspects.
All of these need to put in the proper theoretical and practical
framework. It is hoped that the achievement of the foundation
of the ethical ecosystem will support an effective and efficient
digital monetary ecosystem.

66

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Introducing Maqāsidic Framework

Bibliography

Abu Bakar, Nashirah, Sofian Rosbi, and Kiyotaka Uzaki.
“Cryptocurrency Framework Diagnostics from Islamic
Finance Perspective: A New Insight of Bitcoin System
Transaction.” International Journal of Management Science and
Business Administration 4, no. 1 (2017): 19–28. https://doi.
org/10.18775/ijmsba.1849-5664-5419.2014.41.1003.
Adams, Richard, Glenn Parry, Phil Godsiff, and Peter Ward.
“The Future of Money and Further Applications of
the Blockchain PROPOSAL.” Strategic Change 26, no. 5
(September 1, 2017): 417–22. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jsc.2141.
Al-Raysuni, Ahmad. Imam Al-Shatibi’s Theory of the Hihger
Objectives and Intents of Islamic Law. The International Institute
of Islamic Thought. Vol. 22, 2013. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13398-014-0173-7.2.
Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM). “Anti-Money Laundering and
Counter Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) – Digital
Currencies (Sector 6),” no. Sector 6 (2018).
Bolotaeva, O. S., A. A. Stepanova, and S. S. Alekseeva. “The
Legal Nature of Cryptocurrency.” IOP Conference Series:
Earth and Environmental Science 272, no. 3 (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/272/3/032166.
CPMI. “Central Bank Digital Currencies,” 2018.
Fung, Ben S. C., and Hanna Halaburda. “Central Bank Digital
Currencies: A Framework for Assessing Why and How.”
SSRN Electronic Journal, no. 22 (2016): 1–27. https://
doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.26985.70243.
Islahi, Abdul Azim. “An Analytical Study of Al-Ghazali’s
Thought on Money and Interest.” In The International
Conference on Al-Gazali’s Legacy: Its Contemporary Relevance.
Kuala Lumpur: International Institute of Islamic Thought
and Civilization, 2001.
Ismail, Imran. “Legal Stratagems (Hiyal) and Usury in Islamic
Commercial Law.” University of Birmingham, 2010.

67

TAFHIM Online © IKIM Press
Mohd Noor bin Omar/ TAFHIM 15 No. 1 (June 2022): 51–68

Kosba, Ahmed, Andrew Miller, Elaine Shi, Zikai Wen, and
Charalampos Papamanthou. “Hawk: The Blockchain
Model of Cryptography and Privacy-Preserving Smart
Contracts.” Proceedings - 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy, SP 2016, 2016, 839–58. https://doi.org/10.1109/
SP.2016.55.
Kumhof, Michael, and Clare Noone. “Central Bank Digital
Currencies — Design Principles and Balance Sheet
Implications,” 2018.
Lannquist, Ashley (World Economic Forum). “Central Banks and
Distributed Ledger Technology: How Are Central Banks
Exploring Blockchain Today?” World Economic Forum, 2019.
Nakamoto, Satoshi. “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic
Cash System.” Www.Bitcoin.Org, 2008, 9. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10838-008-9062-0.
Quraishi, Asifa, and Mohammad Hashim Kamali. “Principles
of Islamic Jurisprudence.” Journal of Law and Religion 15,
no. 1/2 (2000): 385. https://doi.org/10.2307/1051529.
Rahman Faridi, Fazlur. “Theory of Fiscal Policy in an Islamic
State.” Journal of King Abdulaziz University: Islamic Economics
1, no. 1 (1983): 15–30.
Toutounchian, Iraj. “Integrating Money in Capital Theory: A
Legal Perspective (Islamic Finance).” … for Islamic Economics
and the Islamic …, 2006, 75–113.
Usmani, Muhammad Taqi. “Post-Crisis Reforms: Some Points
to Ponder,” 2010.
Yussof, Sheila Ainon, and Abdullah Al-Harthy. “Cryptocurrency
as an Alternative Currency in Malaysia : Issues and
Challenges.” Islam and Civilisational Renewal 9, no. 1 (2018):
48–65. https://doi.org/10.12816/0049515.
Zubaidi, Ibrahim Bassam, and Adam Abdullah. “Developing
a Digital Currency from an Islamic Perspective: Case of
Blockchain Technology.” International Business Research 10,
no. 11 (September 29, 2017): 79. https://doi.org/10.5539/
ibr.v10n11p79.

68

