mathematics
Editorial

Mathematics, Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain Technology
José Luis Miralles-Quirós *

and María Mar Miralles-Quirós
Faculty of Economic and Business Sciences, University of Extremadura, 06006 Badajoz, Spain;
marmiralles@unex.es
* Correspondence: miralles@unex.es

Citation: Miralles-Quirós, J.L.;
Miralles-Quirós, M.M. Mathematics,
Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain
Technology. Mathematics 2022, 10,
2038. https://doi.org/10.3390/
math10122038
Received: 8 June 2022
Accepted: 10 June 2022
Published: 12 June 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

This book contains the successful invited submissions [1–9] to a Special Issue of Mathematics on the subject area of “Mathematics, Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain Technology”.
Blockchain is the innovative database technology that is at the heart of nearly all
cryptocurrencies and has already significantly changed the future of money, finance, supply
chain management and more. In this Special Issue, we focus on the pricing mathematics
underlying mathematical and computational methods that can be useful tools for prediction
or for estimating the reasonable value of something.
This Special Issue includes the most important studies of the Cryptocurrencies and
Blockchain Technologies, such as the analysis of the Bitcoin price dynamics, the macroeconomic consequences of introducing Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDC), and concerns
about sustainable development or the Blockchain token economy.
Chen and Huang [1] focus on the issue of the fact that cryptocurrencies involve
significant jump risks and conduct an in-depth investigation of hedging strategies. They
find that the inclusion of jumps in returns and volatilities is significant in the historical time
series of Bitcoin prices. In a similar order, considering Blockchain technology’s potential to
revolutionize stock trading, Cohen [2] proposes a trading system based on second order
stochastic dominance to different cryptocurrencies. He finds that the system is able to
predict long trends but also to outperform the Buy and Hold strategy in most cases.
The COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences were also discussed in this Special
Issue. Boguslavsky et al. [3] state, after performing gallop polls, that one of the main
reasons for the significant rise in cryptocurrencies is that they are an “epidemiologically
safe” means of transaction.
Pinto-Gutiérrez et al. [4] and Guo et al. [5] focus their studies on Tokens and NonFungible Tokens (NFTs), which offer to their holders a medium to purchase various goods,
services or privileges. The former show that Bitcoin returns can predict the following
week’s NFT growth after using different vector autoregressive models, while the latter
propose a “dual incentive value-based” paradigm to improve profitability in Blockchain
token economy. For that reason, they develop a business study case for improving merchants’ environmental states and show that merchants obtain greater profits following the
proposed paradigm.
As mentioned above, this Special Issue also pays attention to one of humanity’s
greatest problems, the development of a sustainable world. Syed et al. [6] focus on the
relationship between green bonds and Bitcoin and find that positive shocks of Bitcoins exert
a positive influence on green bonds. There is also a space for machine-learning models
and their use to discriminate between malicious and non-malicious tokens in different
scenarios, such as the paper of Mazorra et al. [7], but also for predicting Bitcoin’s prices, as
Ye et al. [8] propose.
Finally, we should point out the study of Syarifudding and Bakhtiar [9] who develop a
medium-sized dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model to assess the macroeconomic
consequences of introducing interest-bearing CBDC, finding that they offer a significant
number of macroeconomic benefits.

Mathematics 2022, 10, 2038. https://doi.org/10.3390/math10122038

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/mathematics

Mathematics 2022, 10, 2038

2 of 2

The response to our call had the following statistics:
Submissions (12);
Publications (9);
Rejections (3);
Article types: Research Articles (9);
Authors’ geographical distribution (published papers):
China (3);
Spain (2);
Chile (1);
Colombia (1);
India (1);
Indonesia (1);
Israel (1);
Pakistan (1);
Russia (1);
Taiwan (1).
We found the edition and selections of papers for this book very inspiring and rewarding. We thank the editorial staff and reviewers for their efforts and help during
the process.
Author Contributions: This work is an outcome of the joint efforts of the two authors. Both authors
conceived the research idea, reviewed the related literature and contributed to the interpretation of
the results. They also wrote the manuscript and thoroughly read and approved the final version. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the Junta de Extremadura (Counselling
of Economy, Science and Digital Agenda) and the European Regional Development Fund (“A way
of doing Europe”) under the VI Action Plan for Research and Development 2017/20 through grant
GR21019.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.

Chen, K.; Huang, Y. Detecting Jump Risk and Jump-Diffusion Model for Bitcoin Options Pricing and Hedging. Mathematics 2021,
9, 2567. [CrossRef]
Cohen, G. Trading Cryptocurrencies Using Second Order Stochastic Dominance. Mathematics 2021, 9, 2861. [CrossRef]
Boguslavsky, D.; Sharova, N.; Sharov, K. Cryptocurrency as Epidemiologically Safe Means of Transactions: Diminishing Risk of
SARS-CoV-2 Spread. Mathematics 2021, 9, 3263. [CrossRef]
Pinto-Gutiérrez, C.; Gaitán, S.; Jaramillo, D.; Velasquez, S. The NFT Hype: What Draws Attention to Non-Fungible Tokens?
Mathematics 2022, 10, 335. [CrossRef]
Guo, C.; Zhang, P.; Lin, B.; Song, J. A Dual Incentive Value-Based Paradigm for Improving the Business Market Profitability in
Blockchain Token Economy. Mathematics 2022, 10, 439. [CrossRef]
Syed, A.; Ahmed, F.; Kamal, M.; Ullah, A.; Ramos-Requena, J. Is There an Asymmetric Relationship between Economic Policy
Uncertainty, Cryptocurrencies, and Global Green Bonds? Evidence from the United States of America. Mathematics 2022, 10, 720.
[CrossRef]
Mazorra, B.; Adan, V.; Daza, V. Do Not Rug on Me: Leveraging Machine Learning Techniques for Automated Scam Detection.
Mathematics 2022, 10, 949. [CrossRef]
Ye, Z.; Wu, Y.; Chen, H.; Pan, Y.; Jiang, Q. A Stacking Ensemble Deep Learning Model for Bitcoin Price Prediction Using Twitter
Comments on Bitcoin. Mathematics 2022, 10, 1307. [CrossRef]
Syarifuddin, F.; Bakhtiar, T. The Macroeconomic Effects of an Interest-Bearing CBDC: A DSGE Model. Mathematics 2022, 10, 1671.
[CrossRef]

