To CBDC or not to CBDC. That is the question.
Thomas Conlona , Shaen Corbetb,c , Yang (Greg) Houc , Yang Huc , Charles Larkind,e , Les Oxleyc,∗
a Smurfit

Graduate School of Business, University College Dublin, Ireland

b DCU
c School

Business School, Dublin City University, Dublin 9, Ireland

of Accounting, Finance and Economics, University of Waikato, New Zealand
d Institute

e Krieger

for Policy Research, University of Bath, UK

School of Arts Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
∗ Corresponding

Author: les.oxley@waikato.ac.nz

Abstract
The paper considers the potential motives for Central Banks’ issuance of digital currencies (hereafter CBDC), where an important issue relates to the risk they might subsequently carry due to the
potential misuse of CBDC and the distrust of nations acting outside of expected norms. Against
this, non issuance could significantly undermine an innovation which could act as the future of
finance. However, complex cybercriminality, and both simplistic types of fraud and broad misusage
by “rogue nations” will continue to sharply devalue the very concept of CBDC along with any inherent theoretical benefits for financial stability. Seeking to understand the balance of these motives
for CBDC issuance, we assess whether sentiment provides significant and valuable information for
both policymakers and regulators when attempting to better understand external influences, particularly when creating a product that may possess real and significant economic influence long
into the future. Specifically, we focus on key questions, such as how CBDC-related central bank
releases, severe negative events, and contagion effects sourced within traditional financial markets,
impact upon sentiment related specifically to CBDC.

Keywords: Central Bank; CBDC; Cryptocurrency; Stablecoin; Sentiment; GARCH.

Preprint submitted to SSRN

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

August 31, 2022

1. Introduction
CBDC have generated significant debate within the central banking community, particularly
as many policymakers continue to weigh the theoretical benefits of creation with the simultaneous
threats to stability that potentially exist. The growth of the stablecoin industry has acted as somewhat of a testing phase, through which policy-makers and regulators can observe both expected and
unexpected risks before proceeding further with development and testing. A number of key issues
remain irrespective of design, however, primarily involving the rationale as to why one would seek
to use an inferior CBDC-product as opposed to an asset linked to countries with minimal risk, the
effects and side-effects of interest-bearing CBDC, the transfer of direct risk and contagion through
CBDC establishment and underwriting, de-pegging events which could lead to a reputational catastrophe, the implicit potential for illicit acts such as “rug-pulls” by unethically-acting states, and both
questionable population monitoring and data usage in countries with more liberal industry standards. Moral hazard issues with regards to forced behaviours through legislative changes are also
a significant point of concern, as has been central to the design of a number of recent attempted
CBDC-type products. This research attempts to address an interesting question surrounding the
changes in market sentiment as a result of such incidents, and to quantify what we learn from such
behaviour in anticipation of the creation of the first major CBDC product. Specifically, we focus
on a range of significant hypotheses investigating the affects of central bank announcements, global
geopolitical events, major negative cryptocurrency-related events, and contagion effects inherent
within significant traditional financial market volatility. Each point of analysis develops upon our
understanding as to the key factors that influence sentiment relating to CBDC.
In January 2022, the US Federal Reserve outlined1 what were considered to be the key potential
benefits associated with CBDC, including the ability to meet future system requirements for payment services; the ability to easily extend access to central bank funds; and further improvements
to cross-border payments and financial inclusion. Further the report signals the potential issuance
of a US-focused CBDC to be the source of continued preservation of perceived US-dominance in
world finance. The key identified risks within CBDC products include the many unknown sideeffects associated with such a fundamental change of market structure, much of which has the
ability to disrupt market confidence. Further potential risks surround the escalation of bank runs
and the hindrance of access to traditional liquidity avenues during times of crises.2 Among the key
1 US Federal Reserve Research & Analysis, Money, and Payments: The US Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation, January 2022. Available here.
2 As there is no theoretical, or established limit on the amount of a CBDC that one particular individual or
corporation can potentially hold, periods of financial distress could generate and expand dangers associated with
bank runs for example, as depositors move funds from commercial banks to government held CBDC. To response,
such banks would have to contract their lending, or raise additional debt, which in certain geographical regions

2

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

concerns surrounding CBDC is the functionality of monetary policy implementation, with specific
issues identified with regards to the supply of reserves within the banking system, particularly if a
CBDC was interest bearing, which in turn would elevate investor demand and generate potential
competitive pressures, particularly that sourced internationally. In response, a respective central
bank would therefore be required to expand its own portfolio to generate reserves, which in turn
could propagate market bubbles, and potentially expose central banks to excessive risks. Other
major potential issues have been identified with regards to consumer privacy, the prevention of
financial crimes, exposure to issues surrounding cybercriminality and deterioration of operational
resilience, along with overarching concerns surrounding disruption to the broad safety and stability
of the international financial system. Further potential sovereign misuse of CBDC and broader cryptocurrency also present a significant risk, an accusation that has already been levelled at Venezuela
during the country’s attempted to create the Petro.3
The question arises, however, why might central banks be interested in issuing CBDCs? In
the absense of digital currencies, it is less likely that central banks would be interested in issuing
CBDCs. Given the rapid growth in and clear demand for digital currencies e.g., stable coins which
have the potential to lead to increased financial instability via for example de-pegging, there is a
clear rationale for central banks to drive-out existing digital currencies from the system, given that
they have the potential to destablise the whole financial system. In so doing, the result is that the
stable coin market has access to more stable government backed digital currencies, and CBDCs,
along with central banks/governments have the potential to stabilise the stablecoin market. In
addition, authorities have the ability to potentially monitor and track illicit and illegal operations
which underpin much of the stable coin demand which they are servicing via their CBDC. This
comes, however, at the cost that the CBDC inherits the high risk inherent in the market-issued
stablecoins. The question then turns to whether the stabilisation benefits of a dominant CBDC
outweigh the risk they inherit from the current generation of for example, stable coins.
CBDC advocates point to the ability for individuals and corporations to conduct real-time,
feeless transactions with a currency fully backed as a key positive characteristic. CBDCs become

could prove to be quite difficult due to regulatory changes in response to the 2010 Global Financial Crisis, thereby
generating substantial disintermediation effects [Demirgüç-Kunt et al., 2008, Masciandaro et al., 2013, Anginer et al.,
2018, 2021]. For some regions, such risks must be evaluated in full before proceeding to initiate such a large economic
event.
3 In February 2018, the Petro was issued by the government of Venezuela, described to be backed by the country’s
oil and mineral reserves. The cryptocurrency was intended to coincide with Venezuela’s bolivar currency and was
strongly linked with the key raison d’être of circumventing US sanctions, thereby enabling the country to access
international financial market. In early 2020, Venezuelan president Nicolas Maduro announced that it would be
mandatory for the Venezuelan population to pay with Petro for government document services and other products
such as aviation fuel. In 2019, President Maduro approved for the payment of bonuses in Petros for public employees
and pensioners. To date, there has been no evidence of broad international acceptance of the Petro.

3

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

direct liabilities of central banks, where any person or corporation could transfer without fees to
any other bank or intermediary. In the US, particular pressures appear to have taken hold, as
without little incentive to get involved in CBDC development, competitive pressures with other
major nations could generate short-term ambition to perform so as not to create a technological
and economic lag. To date, the Asia and Pacific has led CBDC exploration, where both China and
India have been observed to be close to successful project completion.4 The IMF have found that
cryptocurrency adoption is greater in countries with higher digital penetration along with weaker
macroeconomic fundamentals, however, it is also simultaneously associated with elevated levels
of corruption. A People’s Bank of China (PBOC) task force began studying central bank digital
currencies in 2014, and the pilot kicked off in October 2020 in Shenzhen.5 In July 2022, the Chinese
digital yuan programme has now been expanded to 23 cities, being used by 1.5 million merchants,
and available to almost one-fifth of the population. However, it has so far failed to overcome mobile
payment platforms such as Alipay and WeChatPay. Testing has indicated that the digital yuan has
some advantages over these apps, particularly as retailers do not pay fees on digital yuan payments,
while transactions can be made without an internet connection.6
The research presented here sets out to establish as to how sentiment relating to Central Bank
Digital Currencies (CBDC hereafter), quantified, and calculated through the use of social media
coverage, has responded to a number of dynamic factors since the growth in focus upon the development of such innovative technology by multiple major central banks. When considering the
sharp differentials of opinion of both proponents and opponents to cryptocurrency development
for a variety of reasons [Bordo and Levin, 2017, Minesso et al., 2022, Williamson, 2021, Davoodalhosseini, 2021], the decisions taken by central banks to investigate, develop, and in some cases,
stress test network ability in real-world test systems, has added substantial credibility and support to stablecoin and cryptocurrency projects. While central bank support has underpinned and
validated the potential within stablecoin-type products [Carapella and Flemming, 2020], we must
establish which specific events have reversed such positivity surrounding CBDC? Specifically, such
work focuses on four distinct avenues of investigation: i) how have central bank announcements
regarding CBDC influenced social media sentiment? ii) what effects have major negative events
within cryptocurrency markets and the de-pegging of stablecoins had? iii) what impact have major
4 Opening Remarks at Peer-Learning Series on Digital Money/Technology: Central Bank Digital Currency and
the Case of China, Krishna Srinivasan, Asia and Pacific Department Director, International Monetary Fund (IMF),
7 July 2022, Available here.
5 The PBOC has adopted a two-tier system for the digital yuan, known as the e-CNY. It first issues e-CNY
to commercial banks, which then further distributes the CBDC to the public. In trials, banks have since become
partners with Chinese merchants, and have been actively promoting the new product by handing out free digital
cash and other benefits such as offering discounts on purchases in digital yuan.
6 In such a situation, near-field communication terminals are used, which can provide a number of additional
performance benefits, such as during natural disasters.

4

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

international shocks such as the COVID-19 pandemic, and the illegal invasion of Ukraine had upon
CBDC-related sentiment; and iv) how have major shocks in other traditional financial markets
influenced CBDC sentiment? Understanding the extent to which major events influence sentiment
relating to CBDC provides significant information for policymakers and regulators when attempting
to better understand externally influential factors, particularly when creating a product that may
have deep-rooted real economic influence in the future.
While the examination of the effects of CBDC-related announcements, major international
events, and the contagion effects implicit within extreme traditional financial markets, each provide
significant information value to policymakers, investors, and regulators, investigation based on depegging events was found to be particularly novel in scope. De-pegging events have been among the
most severe negative incidents that have affected stablecoins, and act as a primary threat to CBDC
development. Li and Mayer [2021] developed a dynamic model based on optimisation of stablecoin
management, and specifically characterise the existence of an instability trap, where stability can
last for a long time, but once stablecoins were negatively affected by external shocks, exceptional
levels of volatility persist. This is largely observed as one of the key reasons as to why debasement
triggers a vicious cycle, however the authors observe it to be unavoidable due to the very fact that
it enhances efficient risk sharing7 between the issuer and user of the stablecoin itself.8 One major
example of de-pegging was recently observed during the recent Luna collapse.9
A number of new and significant results are presented. First, as identified through significant
increases in positive sentiment, central bank announcements relating specifically to CBDC, irrespective of type, were found to provide substantial community reassurance. Furthermore, the COVID-19
pandemic presented elevated levels of positive CBDC commentary on social media, much of which
surrounded the potential use of CBDC to provide an alternative to physical banking, and a greater
service to the unbanked, thereby reducing interaction and potential COVID-19 spread. Thirdly,
the invasion of Ukraine by Russian forces significantly increased negative sentiment with regards to
7 Efficiency improvements through CBDC development are also identified by Keister and Sanches [2021], however
it is also found to crowd out bank deposits, while increasing bank funding costs and simultaneously decreasing
investment.
8 Further, Lyons and Viswanath-Natraj [2020] identified that when focusing on stablecoin issuance, which the
author defines to be the closest representation to direct central-bank intervention, is found to play only a limited
role in the stabilisation process, indicating that such market influence is determined from the demand side.
9 Terra Luna is a cryptocurrency that launched in July 2019, and was linked directly to the Terra token, which was
created by Terraform labs. $LUNA has since forked and re-branded as Terra Luna Classic $LUNC after collapsing
from high values of almost $120.00 in April 2022, before collapsing below $0.00001 by May, identified to be linked
with very significant $UST withdrawals on the Terra ecosystem, thereby dramatically increasing asset supply, as
when $UST was sold, $LUNA was simultaneously created. Multiple investigations are since underway, most notably
where the home of co-creator Do Kwon was raided by South Korean prosecutors as part of a probe into significant
allegations of illegal activity behind Terra’s collapse. The Luna collapse also led to the downfall of Three Arrows
Capital, and lenders and brokers such as Voyager Digital Ltd. and Celsius Network Ltd in the subsequent fallout.

5

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

CBDC, particularly as many theoretically negative characteristics of CBDC became evident, such as
sanction avoidance and the elevated risks of economic warfare. In terms of structural events within
the FinTech industry, de-pegging events within large cryptocurrency products as ranked by market
capitalisation are found to increase positive sentiment incrementally, and significantly across CBDC
market commentary. This result indicates the existence of a preference for substantial government
involvement in such markets. Finally, when considering contagion effects from major market movements in traditional financial markets and developing cryptocurrency markets, pronounced periods
of sustained volatility in traditional assets are fundamentally associated with support for the use of
CBDC as a mechanism through which to promote stability.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: the previous literature and theories that
guide the development of our research are summarised in Section 2. Section 3 presents a thorough
explanation of the wide variety of data used in this analysis, while Section 4 presents a concise
overview of the methodologies used. In Section 5, we present the results surrounding the analyses
that investigate external influences on CBDC-related sentiment, with further discussion provided
based on what such results mean for relevant stakeholders. Section 6 concludes.
2. Previous Literature
CBDCs have been proposed as a product that will enhance our understanding of the way through
which populations utilise cash. To develop as a recognised financial product, however, CBDC must
overcome one of the key obstructions to its continued development in the form of cybercriminality. As per Corbet et al. [2022], particular forms of blockchain and cryptocurrencies present novel
features that can potentially mitigate long-standing challenges within the financial system. Borgonovo et al. [2021] found that anonymity was one of the key appealing factors when agents sought
a medium of payment, with effects found to be reliant on risk aversion and liquidity, an argument
that validates the usage of private cryptocurrency, but emphasises reduced incentive structures for
many to utilise CBDCs. However, it must be considered that the consistent deterioration of stability and trust within cryptocurrency products, the exchanges they trade on, and how they are
used, continue to provide substantial weight to the argument against the continued progression of
digital financial development. Cryptocurrencies have been at the centre of many significant issues.
For example, Foley et al. [2019] estimated that around 46% of bitcoin transactions were predicated
on illegal activity, a finding that was one of the first pieces of research to verify a long-standing assumption underpinning such products, namely, their existence is predicated upon illegality. Betting
volume using digital currencies was also demonstrated to predict future performance of Bitcoin,
indicative of their common use by gamblers [Conlon and McGee, 2020]. Such observations are also
significant when considering the substantive price differentials that can be generated therein. For

6

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

example, when Gandal et al. [2018] investigated the impact of suspicious trading activity on the
Mt. Gox Bitcoin currency exchange, such transactions were found to be responsible for a sharp
increase in the price of Bitcoin in late 2013. While government involvement in such markets could
act as a mechanism that generates stability, viable questions remain as to what contagion effects
and reputational disasters exist within. For example, Belke and Beretta [2020] outlined the specific
difficulties that CBDC would have when replacing fiat currencies. Bindseil [2019] identified that
such CBDC products could disrupt banking and the credit allocation process, along with providing
an additional channel through which systematic banking runs could occur during financial crises.
This latter result appears to contrast, however, with those presented by Fernández-Villaverde et al.
[2021] who suggest that the stability provided by central banks outweighs that of the commercial
banking sector.
Further issues relating to the legality and welfare implications of CBDCs were raised by Nabilou
[2020] and Cukierman [2020] respectively. While Chen and Siklos [2022] outline further avenues
towards instability, however, they note that inflation does not appear to be a major issue within
the presented simulations. Similarly, Ferrari Minesso et al. [2022], through the use of a two-country
DSGE model incorporating CBDC investigate shock transmission, to which the new product is
found to amplify the international spillover of shocks, while Castrén et al. [2022] found that the
introduction of CBDC is theoretically associated with funding shortages in banks, further generating negative contagion effects upon other sectors. Arguments supporting the usage of CBDC are
proposed by Brunnermeier and Niepelt [2019], who had previously found that the combination of
CBDC with central bank pass-through funding, through the use of a model focused on money and
liquidity, found that such a product would not undermine broad financial stability. Further, Agur
et al. [2022] identify that the optimal CBDC design trades off bank intermediation against the social
value of maintaining diverse payment instruments, where an interest-bearing CBDC alleviates the
central bank’s trade-off.
3. Data
Following Cioroianu et al. [2021a,b], we identified and collected Twitter social media data to generate a representative sentiment index relating to CBDC. Twitter data was collected for the period
1 January 2017 through 30 June 2022, representing a collection of 1,452,316 unique tweets.10 The
sentiment variables that were used for computations were computed thereafter using the Python
package ‘pysentiment’ and are specifically based on the Harvard General Inquirer IV-4 dictionary
10 For

brevity of presentation, additional summary statistics based on these tweets are available from the authors
upon request.

7

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

and the Loughran and McDonald Financial Sentiment dictionary.11 This research specifically focuses on the subjectivity and polarity of CBDC-based social media commentary, indicative of the
scale of point-in-time sentiment with regards to its development. Specifically, subjectivity analysis
based on the collated text is a type of sentiment analysis, where using Natural Language Processing
(NLP), researchers separate and classify a text to be opinionated or not opinionated. Within the
identified text, the presence of certain terms such as adjectives, adverbs and some group of verbs and
nouns are therefore identified as indicators of a subjective opinion.12 Building upon this subjectivity
analysis, we next determine as to whether a sentence is opinionated or not. Therefore, we perform
a polarity analysis based on the collated text so as to ascertain whether it expresses a positive or
negative opinion. Polarity analysis is specifically designed to determine the emotional attitude of
text writer with respect to the topic under discussion. Each measure of sentiment includes: 1)
counts of positive terms; 2) counts of negative terms; 3) a measure of polarity calculated as the
number of positive terms minus the number of negative terms divided by the sum of positive and
negative terms, and 4) a measure of subjectivity (effect) calculated as the proportion of negative
and positive terms relative to the total number of terms in the tweet. Social media activity and
related sentiment data over the time period analysed are presented in Figures 1 and 2 respectively.

Insert Figures 1 & 2 about here

Policy discussion and broad research relating to Fintech have been analysed in great detail in
recent times. Corbet et al. [2019] and Allen et al. [2021] provide detailed analyses of the literature
to date, particularly surrounding the shifting focus and attention that these new financial products
have received from central banks and international regulatory authorities. Building upon this
research, and to specifically investigate our first research question based on the influence of central
bank CBDC announcements on CBDC sentiment, we obtain a concise and robust list of dates and
times of the release of key related research. We therefore focus on all announcements made on the
respective websites of the U.S. Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England,
the Bank of Japan, the Swiss National Bank, and the Bank of Canada. Additionally, we employ a
combined search of LexisNexis, Bloomberg, and Thomson Reuters Eikon, search for the keywords
including that of “central bank digital currency” and “CBDC”. Data are presented in Figure 3, and
are subsequently applied within our selected methodological process as a dummy variable that takes
the form of unity on the dates on which CBDC-related research was released by selected central
11 The Harvard General Inquirer IV-4 dictionary is available at the following link and the Loughran and McDonald
Financial Sentiment dictionary is available at the following link.
12 Thus subjectivity analysis is the classification of sentences as subjective opinions or objective facts.

8

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

banks. All observations found to be made on either a Saturday or Sunday are represented on the
following Monday morning.

Insert Figure 3 about here

To investigate the second research question surrounding the effects of major international events
upon CBDC sentiment, we select a number of dates to best represent key phases of the outbreak
and spread of COVID-19, and the illegal invasion of Ukraine by Russian forces. Proponents of
cryptocurrency have often advocated for the use of CBDC as a mechanism to promote stability,
therefore, these events have been observed to be the most disruptive to have occurred in recent
times [Corbet et al., 2020, Conlon et al., 2020, Didier et al., 2021, Berger and Demirgüç-Kunt,
2021, Duncan et al., 2022, Jarrow and Lamichhane, 2022, Levy et al., 2022]. First, we analyse the
first represented mention of a “mystery pneumonia” which occurred on the 17 November 2019, and
subsequently represented the first case of COVID-19 detected in mainland China as reported by the
South China Morning Post [Corbet et al., 2020]. Further, we utilise the first official identification13
by international organisations such as the World Health Organisation (WHO), which was on the
31 December 2019. Moreover, we analyse the extent to which the escalating severity and contagion
of the COVID-19 pandemic influenced CBDC sentiment. To conduct this task, we focus on the
first announced deaths within China, Europe, and the United States, which are observed as major
points indicating the escalating severity of the pandemic [Conlon et al., 2020, Akhtaruzzaman
et al., 2021, Corbet et al., 2021a,b, 2022a,b,c]. Within this context, developing upon Johns Hopkins
University CSSE data, we observe dates based around 23 January 2020, where 1 confirmed death was
announced in China as a result of COVID-19, and both 15 February 2020 and 2 March 2020, where
subsequent COVID-19-related deaths were announced in Europe and the United States, respectively.
In what has represented as one of the most significant events in recent memory, the decision by
Russia to illegally invade Ukraine represents a severe shock to financial markets akin to the dot
com bubble, subprime market collapse and subsequent international banking crises [Bredin et al.,
2015, Conlon et al., 2020]. To investigate this event, we use a dummy variable representing the 24
February 2022, indicative of the beginning of the invasion. Within the context of discussions relating
to CBDC, particular interest had been placed on the potential of cryptocurrencies to function as a
conduit through which Russian citizens could mitigate, or completely avoid international sanctions.
To date, however, little evidence has been presented indicating the use of such channels.
13 This event was subsequently followed with substantial media reporting, where for example, the BBC announced
on 3 January 2020 that a pneumonia-like ‘mystery virus’ with characteristics similar to the SARs (severe acute
respiratory syndrome) pandemic of, 2002 through 2003, had been identified.

9

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Insert Figure 4 about here
Next, we focused on the influence of major de-pegging events upon CBDC sentiment. Such
events have been observed to generate severe reputational damage to broad cryptocurrencies. depegging refers to a situation where the value of a stablecoin is found to significantly deviate from
its intended peg, therefore, it can be said to be de-pegged. To establish an exact definition, this
research examines a number of de-pegging rules, findings that one based on a 10% move away from
the stated peg is most representative of major events. Results were estimated across a variety
of differential rules, however, once de-pegging events beyond 10% are analysed, with no evidence
of significant differentials to those described above. In Figure 4, we present the frequency of
cryptocurrency de-pegging events, as separated by the market capitalisation of the cryptocurrency
that has subsequently lost its peg. Within this context, we attempt to separate the effects of depegging based on larger, more well-known cryptocurrencies when compared to those of lower value
and less comparative market influence.14 When a de-pegging event is identified, a dummy variable
included in the stated methodology takes a value of unity.
Insert Table 1 about here
To investigate the influence of financial market products upon CBDC sentiment, we select four
distinct types of market upon which we analyse market interactions: i) foreign exchange; ii) traditional stock markets; iii) volatility derivatives; and iv) cryptocurrencies. The securities analysed are
selected based on size, as identified by market capitalisation, and liquidity, and associated summary
statistics are presented in Table 1. Evidence of significant volatility dynamics relating to Russian
markets as a result of the flawed decision to initiate conflict through illegal invasion is evident
through kurtosis and maxima that are more aligned with volatility derivatives and cryptocurrency
products, than that of stable countries. Data was obtained from Thomson Reuters Eikon for the
period between 1 January 2017 and 30 June 2022 and was subsequently matched with the generated CBDC sentiment data and described dummy variables, through which daily returns were
obtained. Overall, data is matched by product. While social media data and cryptocurrency data
are available at all times throughout the week, this data remains unchanged and accounts for 2,060
observations. Markets with structured operational times have weekends removed, and therefore
account for 1,471 observations. Analyses were repeated to both include and exclude weekend social
media data; however, results remain unchanged. The effects of major social media events that occur
14 Q1 through Q4 represent the quartile of respective market capitalisation, where Q1 represents the largest quartile
of stablecoins by size, while Q4 represents the smallest.

10

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

upon weekends are observed to generate associated effects upon the date on which markets reopen.
Therefore, the decision to proceed with our analysis while excluding such weekend data is observed
to be robust.
4. Methodology
We develop a GARCH(1,1) methodology to investigate the effects of external factors upon
CBDC sentiment in an attempt to further our understanding of these new financial products.15
An intercept and a deterministic trend were included in the Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) and
Phillips Perron (PP) models. The trend was included to capture the reduction in average volatility
that took place during the period analysed. The ADF model tests whether the equity series contain
a unit root in order to correct for serial correlation. PP tests employ a non-parametric estimator
of the variance-covariance matrix with d truncation lags. The models assess through the process of
sequentially removing the last lag until a significant lag is reached giving the order of augmentation
for the ADF test that minimised the Akaike information criterion. The results indicated rejection
of the null-unit root hypotheses at a minimum ofthe 5% level.
 We next proceed to calculate the
St
first difference of natural logarithm of sentiment st = ln St−1 , which are then further developed
through the use of the GARCH(1,1) framework, that allows us to control for the basic phenomenon
that the volatility behaviour is not constant across time. Therefore, we specifically set out to
identify differential behaviour in CBDC sentiment outside of long-term trends. The ARCH process
originally developed by Engle [1982], and later generalised by Bollerslev [1986], allows us to capture
the time-series properties of the volatility process. Specification tests found that, as is typically the
case with financial series, a GARCH(1,1) model provided the best fit in the majority of analyses
cases.16 The GARCH(1,1) methodology used then has the following specification:
st = at +

X

b1,j st−j + b2 ϕt + b3 dt + εt ,

(1)

j=1
2
σt2 = σ0 + σ1 ε2t−1 + β1 σt−1
,

(2)

15 In our selection, other competitive models included EGARCH, TGARCH, Asymmetric Power ARCH (APARCH),
Component GARCH (CGARCH) and the Asymmetric Component GARCH (ACGARCH) were analysed while the
optimal model was chosen according to three information criteria, namely the Akaike (AIC), Bayesian (BIC) and
Hannan-Quinn (HQ), but GARCH was found to outperform each methodology. Results of the other additional
analyses are available from the authors on request.
16 Where other methodological structures are identified to have provided a more optimal structure as per the utilised
information criterion, direct reference is made within the provided results.

11

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

where st−j represents the lagged value of the analysed sentiment over time. ϕt represents the
performance of the MSCI World Index17 , which is used to account for international effects18 with
the methodological structure. The GARCH (1,1) specification requires that in the conditional
variance equation, parameters α0 , α1 and β should be positive for a non-negativity condition and
the sum of α1 and β should be less than one to secure the covariance stationarity of the conditional
variance. Moreover, the sum of the coefficients α1 and β must be less than or equal to unity for
stability to hold. dt represents an individual dummy variable used to analyse the specific effects of
each series as previously established, examined separately and based around the effects of central
bank announcements relating to CBDC, the effects of major international events, and the influence
of major de-pegging events. The final stage of analysis, specifically relates to that investigating the
effects of traditional financial market asset volatility upon CBDC sentiment, taking the form of first
identifying the dates upon which significant movements in absolute returns occur, and then proceeds
to separate the effects based on the size of the outlier event that has occurred. To this effect, we
further develop our selected GARCH(p,q) methodology through the addition of a dummy variable,
dt that takes a value of unity on dates upon which presented minima and maxima of the selected
analysed assets breach pre-stated absolute return thresholds. Considering the presented minima
and maxima of returns over time, a variety of separational rules were implemented. For brevity
of presentation, only those results representing absolute changes of 2.5% and 5% with regards to
foreign exchange and stock market products, and both 5% and 10% with regards to derivative
products and cryptocurrencies, are presented within this research. Such band selection was made
due to the lack of observations relating to absolute returns above 10% that occurred in foreign
exchange and stock markets during the examined period.19
5. Results
5.1. The influence of international central bank releases based upon CBDC sentiment
In the first stage of our analysis, we focus on the interactions between central bank announcements based on CBDC, and their specific influence upon sentiment relating to CBDC. For robustness, we build upon both the Harvard General Inquirer IV-4 and the Loughran and McDonald
Financial sentiment dictionary. In Table 2, we observe that in both examined methodological
structures, the selected GARCH-family frameworks are found to be both robust and appropriately
17 The MSCI World Index captures both large and mid-cap representation across 23 developed markets countries.
It is identified to account for approximately 85% of the free float-adjusted market capitalisation in each country
18 A number of alternative methodological structures and representative measures of international effects were
considered. For brevity, results relating to these analyses are available from the authors on request.
19 Results were also analysed at 3%, 4%, 6% and 8% levels respectively, however, results were indifferent in nature
to those presented. Results relating to all other stated analyses are available from the authors upon request.

12

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

behaved, with results showing sharp, significant increases at the 1% level of positive sentiment relating to CBDC. Investigating CBDC sentiment under the structure of the Harvard General Inquirer
IV-4 dictionary presents evidence of an increase in positive sentiment of 2.6% in the periods after
CBDC-related announcements, while using the Loughran and McDonald Financial sentiment dictionary, on average, a significant increase of 6.3% is identified. Therefore, on average, when central
banks discuss CBDC or release relevant information, social media is found to respond positively.
Insert Table 2 about here
Such a result provides multiple levels of reassurance with regards to current CBDC projects and
the manner in which central banks can reassure and calm investors. Currently, over one hundred
countries are exploring the use of CBDC including Anguilla; Antigua and Barbuda; The Bahamas;
Dominica; Grenada; Jamaica; Montserrat; Nigeria; Saint Kitts & Nevis; Saint Lucia; and Saint
Vincent & the Grenadines. In Nigeria in particular, it has been estimated that over one hundred
million people do not have access to banking, therefore, the ability to leverage some of the strengths
provided through CBDC will hope to outweigh the identified negative aspects. In Ecuador and the
Philippines, CBDC projects have since been completely cancelled.20 . While many major nations
have committed CBDC projects, a significant number have become inactive, while others remain
in phases of research and development without the provision of regular updates. The above results
identify, however, that central bank announcements appear to result in positive sentiment regarding
CBDC.
5.2. The influence of negative international events upon CBDC sentiment
Focusing on the impacts of severe negative international events upon CBDC sentiment provides
evidence of a number of interesting informational dynamics. Both the LM and HI dictionaries are
used to provide methodological robustness, with results presented in Table 3. When focusing on the
first unofficial announcement surrounding the existence of a “mysterious pneumonia” in China, as
20 In February 2022, the CBDC created by the government of the Philippines was announced to have been cancelled
The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) Governor Benjamin E. Diokno stated: “The BSP has no plans to introduce
a CBDC in the near term primarily because the population remains heavily cash reliant given the country’s efficient
and effective payment and settlement systems”. In Ecuador, the Dinero Electronico, which ran between 2014 and
2018, was a mobile payment system developed by the Banco Central del Ecuador. It allowed Ecuadorian citizens to
transfer US dollar using electronic devices. Arauz et al. [2021] identified that a number of key issues persisted with
the Dinero Electronico that inevitably generated much public concern: i) the CBDC was not fully backed, so it is
therefore more akin to a parallel currency; ii) it could not be used to make international payments; iii) the asset
was broadly considered to facilitate criminal activity; iv) the asset had the ability to act as a significant surveillance
program; v) there was continued public fear that the government might force public procurement suppliers or the
public in general to receive transfers solely in through the asset; and vi) the asset could not be used to buy anything
of significant value.

13

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

reported by the South China Morning Post on the 17 November 2019, we observe that there was no
evidence of any significant response with regards to CBDC sentiment. This result is not unexpected,
as quite broadly, financial markets did not appear to quantify the scale of forthcoming risks to which
it would be confronted [Conlon et al., 2021, 2022]. Further, upon the official identification of the
existence of the COVID-19 pandemic, no significance change of sentiment is identified. It is at
the time of the first official announcement of a death relating to COVID-19 as per Johns Hopkins
University CSSE Data, that we observe a significant increase in positivity surrounding CBDC.
At this time, we must also note that due to strict lockdown procedures implemented in China, a
substantial conversation had begun about the manner and mechanisms through which the economy
would continue to operate in an environment in which COVID-19 would be a factor that populations
would have to live with in daily life. This had repercussions for simplistic processes such as banking
and the use of physical cash, both of which had been severely disrupted due to the onset of the
pandemic. Therefore, further research and development of Chinese CBDC continued to develop
at pace in response. It is also found that the rise in the positivity of CBDC sentiment diminishes
as time passes following the first Chinese deaths. Such a result implies that there might exist an
overreaction as to the wish list of CBDC when the news initially becomes available to the public. It
corresponds with the business and social environments in China where massive contactless online
payments are available as reflected by widespread use of WeChat Pay and Alipay. The result may
further align with a revelation of ambition to erect a CBDC system by the Chinese government.
While the immediate CBDC sentiment response to the announcements of the first European and
US-based COVID-19 deaths are not as pronounced as that experienced in China, they are each found
to become significantly positive in the four-week period thereafter. Results indicate that the onset
of the COVID-19 pandemic presented a significant positive change in sentiment, particularly as
many identified the simultaneous structural and safety benefits through providing an alternative to
physical banking and transactions, and the ability of CBDC to provide an alternative to those with
no direct access to banking, while simultaneously reducing the necessity for physical interactions,
thereby reducing the risk of COVID-19 contagion effects.21

Insert Table 3 about here

When considering the effects of the start of illegal Russian invasion of Ukraine, the influence
identified upon CBDC sentiment is in stark contrast. Across both the LM and HI analyses, results
21 Lockdowns and social distancing measures are accelerating the use of digital RMB in China. As of 31 December
2021, there have been more than 8.0851 million digital RMB pilot scenarios with a transaction amount of 87.565
billion yuan.

14

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

indicate a sharp increase in the negativity of social media response surrounding CBDC. Two particular issues are noted to be potentially associated with this result. Firstly, in the period immediately
surrounding the invasion, much focus was placed upon the implementation of sanctions upon the
Russian economy. However, simultaneously, it was evident that cryptocurrencies, particularly that
of stablecoins, and subsequently CBDC, had drawn much criticism when identified as a viable mechanism through which sanctions could be mitigated or completely avoided.22 This potential causal
factor is quite plausible when considering the continued deterioration of sentiment throughout the
period between five and twenty days after the incident. Further, the future of CBDC appears to
have drawn significant negative attention when considering that countries and central banks that
hold the ownership rights to a CBDC could act in the same manner as Russia, could in fact hold
significant power and ability to freeze, and even take control of assets held through CBDC should
such a situation transpire.
5.3. The influence of major de-pegging events upon CBDC sentiment
One of the most reputationally damaging types of events that have occurred in recent times has
been that of the de-pegging of cryptocurrencies, indicative of a broad decoupling of the asset from
the stated pegging mechanism. With regards to the creation of a CBDC, such a de-pegging would
represent a serious and unprecedented breach of structure. Table 4 presents results of the analyses
of the effects upon CBDC sentiment as separated by the market capitalisation using both the HI
and LM sentiment dictionaries.

Insert Table 4 about here

Evidence suggests substantial differentials of response. While de-pegging events are found to
generate a moderate differential response when considering events relating to small cryptocurrencies,
the effects of de-pegging events surrounding large cryptocurrencies are identified to be extremely
large in comparison to all other types of events analysed in this research. This result is surprising,
and indicative of a call for government involvement in such markets. For example, in response
to significant de-pegging events, and as a mechanism to provide support and stability for these
growing markets, CBDC proponents appear to advocate for government creation of CBDC so as
22 In March 2022, a US executive order based on cryptocurrency, focused on mitigating illegal activity in cryptocurrency markets. Following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, authorities were acutely concerned about the potential
usage of cryptocurrency for Russian individuals and companies evade international sanctions. Proponents of cryptocurrency have stated this to be difficult due to the fact that all transactions are visible on the blockchain of major
cryptocurrency, while smaller assets are simply too illiquid. Specifically, the executive order focused on six key priorities: i) consumer and investor protection; ii) financial stability; iii) illicit finance; iv) US leadership in the global
financial system and economic competitiveness; v) financial inclusion; and vi) responsible innovation.

15

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

to mitigate the influence of private agents, hence such a positive response. Simply, support for
government intervention surrounds a reduction of cybercriminality within these markets, however,
as the US Federal Reserve identified in a report from early 2022, such ambitious mechanisms to
promote system stability can also consequentially generate issues upon third parties. Such sideeffects would potentially manifest within potential dysfunctional monetary policy implementation,
the unintentional propagation of market bubbles, escalated threats to consumer privacy, broad
unintended exposure to issues surrounding novel forms cybercriminality, and diminished operational
resilience.
5.4. The influence of traditional market volatility upon CBDC sentiment
Finally, we analyse the effects of extreme market movements across a range of traditional financial markets and cryptocurrency in an attempt to identify specific influence upon CBDC sentiment.
In Table 5, we observe the influence of absolute market movements of beyond 2.5% using both
LM and HI sentiment dictionaries. Of the ten major currencies analyses, only EUR/USD and
GBP/USD are found to function as a catalyst of positive CBDC-related sentiment. That is, as
extreme events occur in such markets, commentators are found to develop and focus specific arguments in support of the use of CBDC. However, adding further robustness to earlier presented
results, significant daily deviations in the value of RUB/USD are found to generate significant negative CBDC sentiment, verifying arguments surrounding the generation of counterarguments to the
use of CBDC going forwards due to the inherent instability generated from countries acting outside
of traditional expectations.

Insert Tables 5 & 6 about here

Stock market effects are presented in Table 6. While results based on the ten largest world
stock markets are presented, only significant movements within the S&P500 in the United States,
and the Shanghai stock exchange in China present positive effects upon CBDC-related sentiment.
Building upon earlier observation, it appears that pronounced periods of sustained volatility in
traditional assets are fundamentally associated with support of the use of CBDC as a mechanism
through which to provide stability, despite the many known and unknown associated side-effects.
This observation is further verified through results presented in Table 7, where in all examined
cases, extreme movements in volatility derivatives products are found to be quickly followed by a
significant growth of positive sentiment surrounding the use of CBDC.

Insert Tables 7 & 8 about here

16

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

In Table 8, we observe that significant events within the largest analysed cryptocurrencies are
also associated with significantly positive changes in sentiment, although the magnitude of such
change is found to be below that identified across the other presented analyses. This result is
particularly interesting. While many consider co-movements and broad contagion effects to be
insulated within cryptocurrency as a broad asset class, such evidence shows that there exist subsectoral differentials, such as differential behaviour between examined mineable cryptocurrencies
and those described to be asset-backed stablecoins. While adding further support to the continued
development of cryptocurrency market depth, such results also add further robustness and weight
to earlier presented results based upon the significant influence upon CBDC sentiment as a result
of de-pegging events. While volatility across many assets and types of events generate differentials
with regards to market sentiment surrounding CBDC, evidence supports the existence of developing
informational efficiency, and that, in extremely damaging events in cryptocurrency markets, there
is preference for government involvement rather than the continued trust of private cryptocurrency
owners. As the frequency and severity of both de-pegging events and incidents relating to both
complex and simplistic cybercriminality continue to grow, governments must very carefully consider
as to whether the provision of CBDC is legally, ethically, technologically, and most importantly,
reputationally efficient. The rise of privately held cryptocurrencies has also provided policymakers
with an opportunity to transform the financial system through publicly issued cryptocurrencies. The
rise of privately held cryptocurrencies are regularly considered a threat to the financial establishment
and by issuing a CBDC, policymakers may see this as one means to maintain control over monetary
policy.
Our results suggest a shock-driven relation between the financial uncertainties and sentimentbacked demand of CBDC. Despite that the rising popularity of decentralised, weakly regulated and
privately owned cryptocurrencies among global investment professions as well as detected enhanced
information flows from those to traditional risky counterparts, significantly provoked sentimental
demand of strictly regulated, reputation backed and centralised CBDC is evidenced widely following
the shocks and disasters in the global financial systems and economic occurrences. Henceforth, it
is implied that the sentimental momentum that stakeholders advocate for the advent of CBDC
may be an important factor considered for the devising process of digital currencies. And it may
also potentially impact the pricing dynamics of CBDC when it is initially launched. Moreover, the
results in this study provide more hints as to the drawbacks of currently prevailing cryptocurrencies
in a perspective of investors’ sentimental dynamics as to their major counterparts in the future.

17

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

6. Concluding Comments
This research sets out, through the use of robust methodological processes, to establish as to
how sentiment relating to CBDC as quantified through social media coverage, has responded to a
number of dynamic factors since 2017. Specifically understanding influential factors upon CBDC
sentiment provides significant and valuable information for both policymakers and regulators when
attempting to better understand external influences, particularly when creating a product that may
possess significant economic influence long into the future. Specifically, we focus on key questions,
such as how CBDC-related central bank releases, severe negative events, and contagion effects
sourced within traditional financial markets, influence sentiment related specifically to CBDC.
Several key observations are identified. First, identified through significant elevations of positive
sentiment, central bank announcements relating specifically to CBDC are identified to provide
substantial reassurance to the population when considering the many associated negative issues and
unknowns. Secondly, the COVID-19 pandemic presented a significant increase of positive change
associated with CBDC social media commentary, particularly as many identified the simultaneous
structural and safety benefits contained therein, specifically through the provision of an alternative
to physical banking, while simultaneously reducing the necessity for physical interactions, thereby
reducing the risk of COVID-19 contagion effects. Thirdly, the invasion of Ukraine by Russian forces
significantly increased negative sentiment with regards to CBDC, particularly as much emphasis
was placed upon the ability of a rogue nation to use such products to conduct illicit practices such as
sanction avoidance, and the theft of international funds and data. Fourth, de-pegging events within
large cryptocurrency products as ranked by market capitalisation are found to increase positive
sentiment incrementally, and significantly across CBDC market commentary. This result indicates
the existence of a substantial preference for direct government involvement in such markets. For
example, in response to significant de-pegging events, and as a mechanism to provide support and
stability for these growing markets, CBDC proponents appear to advocate for government creation
of CBDC so as to mitigate the influence of private agents, therefore, reducing cybercriminality
within these markets. Finally, when considering contagion effects from major market movements
in traditional financial markets and developing cryptocurrency markets, pronounced periods of
sustained volatility in traditional assets are fundamentally associated with support for the use of
CBDC as a mechanism through which to provide stability.
The debate surrounding the creation of viable government backed CBDC products has certainly
progressed in recent times. Evidence suggests that it progressed during periods of exceptional
volatility as proponents seek support and influence. However, the potential misuse of CBDC and
distrust of nations acting outside of expected norms appear to significantly devalue what could, in
the future, function as the future of finance. Within this scope, broad worldwide development would

18

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

be a preferable platform, in an industry with agreed-upon regulation and standards. Otherwise,
complex cybercriminality, and both simplistic types of fraud and broad misuse by “rogue nations”
will continue to sharply devalue the very concept of CBDC along with any inherent hopes of
financial stability that are theoretically plausible therein. While COVID-19 has generated safetydriven rationale underpinning the foundations of CBDC, and theory suggests that such products can
provide a valuable service to the unbanked, potential misuse by nations such as Russia amongst
others for the purpose sanction avoidance, and Venezuela amongst others to mitigate extreme
economic depression, will continue to devalue and undermine CBDC as a viable financial product.

References
Agur, I., A. Ari, and G. Dell’Ariccia (2022). Designing central bank digital currencies. Journal of Monetary
Economics 125, 62–79.
Akhtaruzzaman, M., S. Boubaker, and A. Sensoy (2021). Financial contagion during COVID–19 crisis. Finance
Research Letters 38.
Allen, F., X. Gu, and J. Jagtiani (2021). A Survey of Fintech Research and Policy Discussion. Review of Corporate
Finance 1 (3-4), 259–339.
Anginer, D., A. C. Bertay, R. Cull, A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and D. S. Mare (2021). Bank capital regulation and risk
after the Global Financial Crisis. Journal of Financial Stability, 100891.
Anginer, D., A. Demirguc-Kunt, H. Huizinga, and K. Ma (2018). Corporate governance of banks and financial
stability. Journal of Financial Economics 130 (2), 327–346.
Arauz, A., R. Garratt, and D. F. Ramos F. (2021). Dinero electrónico: The rise and fall of ecuador’s central bank
digital currency. Latin American Journal of Central Banking 2 (2), 100030.
Belke, A. and E. Beretta (2020). From cash to central bank digital currencies and cryptocurrencies: a balancing act
between modernity and monetary stability. Journal of Economic Studies 47 (4), 911–938.
Berger, A. and A. Demirgüç-Kunt (2021). Banking research in the time of COVID-19. Journal of Financial Stability 57.
Bindseil, U. (2019). Central Bank Digital Currency: Financial System Implications and Control. International
Journal of Political Economy 48 (4), 303–335.
Bollerslev, T. (1986). Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity. Journal of Econometrics 31 (3),
307–327.
Bordo, M. D. and A. T. Levin (2017). Central bank digital currency and the future of monetary policy. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

19

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Borgonovo, E., S. Caselli, A. Cillo, D. Masciandaro, and G. Rabitti (2021). Money, privacy, anonymity: What do
experiments tell us? Journal of Financial Stability 56.
Bredin, D., T. Conlon, and V. Potì (2015). Does gold glitter in the long-run? Gold as a hedge and safe haven across
time and investment horizon. International Review of Financial Analysis 41, 320–328.
Brunnermeier, M. and D. Niepelt (2019). On the equivalence of private and public money. Journal of Monetary
Economics 106, 27–41.
Carapella, F. and J. Flemming (2020). Central bank digital currency: A literature review. FEDS Notes. Washington:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Castrén, O., I. Kavonius, and M. Rancan (2022). Digital currencies in financial networks. Journal of Financial
Stability 60.
Chen, H. and P. Siklos (2022). Central bank digital currency: A review and some macro-financial implications.
Journal of Financial Stability 60.
Cioroianu, I., S. Corbet, and C. Larkin (2021a). Guilt through association: Reputational contagion and the Boeing
737-MAX disasters. Economics Letters 198, 109657.
Cioroianu, I., S. Corbet, and C. Larkin (2021b). The differential impact of corporate blockchain-development as
conditioned by sentiment and financial desperation. Journal of Corporate Finance 66, 101814.
Conlon, T., S. Corbet, G. Hou, Y. Hu, and L. Oxley (2022). Beyond the Noise–Information Discovery in Bitcoin
Revisited. Available at SSRN 4145789 .
Conlon, T., S. Corbet, and R. McGee (2020). Are cryptocurrencies a safe haven for equity markets? An international
perspective from the COVID-19 pandemic. Research in International Business and Finance 54.
Conlon, T., S. Corbet, and R. J. McGee (2021). Inflation and cryptocurrencies revisited: A time-scale analysis.
Economics Letters 206, 109996.
Conlon, T., J. Cotter, and P. Molyneux (2020). Beyond common equity: The influence of secondary capital on bank
insolvency risk. Journal of Financial Stability 47.
Conlon, T. and R. J. McGee (2020). Betting on bitcoin: Does gambling volume on the blockchain explain bitcoin
price changes? Economics Letters 191, 108727.
Corbet, S., J. Goodell, and S. Günay (2020). Co-movements and spillovers of oil and renewable firms under extreme
conditions: New evidence from negative WTI prices during COVID-19. Energy Economics 92.
Corbet, S., M. Greene, and C. Larkin (2022). The Impact of Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) Development
on Cryptocurrency: A Taxonomic Analysis. Review of Corporate Finance.
Corbet, S., Y. Hou, Y. Hu, and L. Oxley (2020). The influence of the COVID-19 pandemic on asset-price discovery:
Testing the case of Chinese informational asymmetry. International Review of Financial Analysis 72, 101560.
Corbet, S., Y. Hou, Y. Hu, and L. Oxley (2021a). An analysis of investor behaviour and information flows surrounding
the negative WTI oil price futures event. Energy Economics 104.

20

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Corbet, S., Y. Hou, Y. Hu, and L. Oxley (2021b). Volatility spillovers during market supply shocks: The case of
negative oil prices. Resources Policy 74.
Corbet, S., Y. Hou, Y. Hu, and L. Oxley (2022a). Did COVID-19 tourism sector supports alleviate investor fear?
Annals of Tourism Research 95.
Corbet, S., Y. Hou, Y. Hu, and L. Oxley (2022b). Financial contagion among COVID-19 concept-related stocks in
China. Applied Economics 54 (21), 2439–2452.
Corbet, S., Y. Hou, Y. Hu, and L. Oxley (2022c). The influence of the COVID-19 pandemic on the hedging
functionality of Chinese financial markets. Research in International Business and Finance 59.
Corbet, S., B. Lucey, A. Urquhart, and L. Yarovaya (2019). Cryptocurrencies as a financial asset: A systematic
analysis. International Review of Financial Analysis 62, 182–199.
Cukierman, A. (2020). Reflections on welfare and political economy aspects of a central bank digital currency.
Manchester School 88 (S1), 114–125.
Davoodalhosseini, S. M. (2021). Central bank digital currency and monetary policy. Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 104150.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., E. Detragiache, and T. Tressel (2008). Banking on the principles: Compliance with Basel Core
Principles and bank soundness. Journal of Financial Intermediation 17 (4), 511–542.
Didier, T., F. Huneeus, M. Larrain, and S. Schmukler (2021). Financing firms in hibernation during the COVID-19
pandemic. Journal of Financial Stability 53.
Duncan, E., A. Horvath, D. Iercosan, B. Loudis, A. Maddrey, F. Martinez, T. Mooney, B. Ranish, K. Wang,
M. Warusawitharana, and C. Wix (2022). COVID-19 as a stress test: Assessing the bank regulatory framework.
Journal of Financial Stability 61.
Engle, R. F. (1982). Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance of United Kingdom
inflation. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 987–1007.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., D. Sanches, L. Schilling, and H. Uhlig (2021). Central bank digital currency: Central
banking for all? Review of Economic Dynamics 41, 225–242.
Ferrari Minesso, M., A. Mehl, and L. Stracca (2022). Central bank digital currency in an open economy. Journal of
Monetary Economics 127, 54–68.
Foley, S., J. Karlsen, and T. Putnins (2019). Sex, Drugs, and Bitcoin: How Much Illegal Activity Is Financed through
Cryptocurrencies? Review of Financial Studies 32 (5), 1798–1853.
Gandal, N., J. Hamrick, T. Moore, and T. Oberman (2018). Price manipulation in the Bitcoin ecosystem. Journal
of Monetary Economics 95, 86–96.
Jarrow, R. and S. Lamichhane (2022). Risk premia, asset price bubbles, and monetary policy. Journal of Financial
Stability 60.
Keister, T. and D. R. Sanches (2021). Should central banks issue digital currency? Available at SSRN 3966817 .

21

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Levy, D., T. Mayer, and A. Raviv (2022). Economists in the 2008 financial crisis: Slow to see, fast to act. Journal
of Financial Stability 60.
Li, Y. and S. Mayer (2021). Money creation in decentralized finance: A dynamic model of stablecoin and crypto
shadow banking. Fisher College of Business Working Paper (2020-03), 030.
Lyons, R. K. and G. Viswanath-Natraj (2020). What keeps stablecoins stable? Technical report, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Masciandaro, D., R. V. Pansini, and M. Quintyn (2013). The economic crisis: Did supervision architecture and
governance matter? Journal of Financial Stability 9 (4), 578–596.
Minesso, M. F., A. Mehl, and L. Stracca (2022). Central bank digital currency in an open economy. Journal of
Monetary Economics 127, 54–68.
Nabilou, H. (2020). Testing the waters of the Rubicon: the European Central Bank and central bank digital currencies.
Journal of Banking Regulation 21 (4), 299–314.
Williamson, S. D. (2021). Central bank digital currency and flight to safety. Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 104146.

22

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Figure 1: Social media sentiment relating to Central Bank Digital Currencies
a) Twitter data based on CBDC
i) Tweets

ii) Retweets

iii) Likes

b) HI Estimates
i) HI Polarity

ii) HI Subjectivity

c) LM Estimates
i) LM Polarity

ii) LM Subjectivity

Note: Twitter social media data was collected to generate a representative index of related sentiment that could be
incorporated into our selected methodological processes analysing each cryptocurrency, individually and by type as per
Cioroianu et al. [2021b,a]. To complete this task, Twitter data was collected for a period between 1 January 2017 and 30
June 2022. A total number of 1,452,316 unique tweets were collected. Associated sentiment variables were computed using
the Python package ‘pysentiment’ and are based on the Harvard General Inquirer IV-4 dictionary and the Loughran and
McDonald Financial Sentiment dictionary.

23

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Figure 2: Estimated differentials of social media response
i) HI Differentials (Positive & Negative)

ii) LM Differentials (Positive & Negative)

Note: Twitter social media data was collected to generate a representative index of related sentiment that could be
incorporated into our selected methodological processes analysing each cryptocurrency, individually and by type as per
Cioroianu et al. [2021b,a]. To complete this task, Twitter data was collected for a period between 1 January 2017 and 30
June 2022. A total number of 1,452,316 unique tweets were collected. Associated sentiment variables were computed using
the Python package ‘pysentiment’ and are based on the Harvard General Inquirer IV-4 dictionary and the Loughran and
McDonald Financial Sentiment dictionary.

24

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Figure 3: International Central Bank releases based on Central Bank Digital Currencies

Note: The above figures present the combined announcements made on the respective websites of the U.S. Federal
Reserve, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the Swiss National Bank, and the Bank of
Canada. inclusive of terms relating "central bank digital currency" and "CBDC" respectively. Data is further developed as
a dummy variable that is used in the described GARCH methodological process.

25

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Figure 4: Frequency of cryptocurrency de-pegging events as separated by market capitalisation
i) de-pegging Q4

ii) de-pegging Q3

iii) de-pegging Q2

iv) de-pegging Q1

Note: The above figures represent the frequency of cryptocurrency de-pegging events. de-pegging refers to a situation
where the value of a stablecoin is found to significantly deviate from its intended peg, therefore, it can be said to be
depegged. To establish an exact definition, this research builds upon a number of de-pegging rules, but found that based
on a 10% move away from the stated peg to be most representative of major events. Results were estimated across a
variety of differential rules, however, once de-pegging events beyond 10% are analysed, results do not present evidence of
significant differentials to those presented above. When a de-pegging event is identified, a dummy variable included in the
stated methodology takes a value of unity. Q1 through Q4 represent the quartile of respective market capitalisation, where
Q1 represents the largest quartile of stablecoins by size, while Q4 represents the smallest.

26

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Table 1: Summary statistics based on the selected financial products analysed
Product Analysed

Mean

Var

Std Dev

Skew

Kurt

Min

Max

0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
-0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001

0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0003

0.0043
0.0055
0.0047
0.0043
0.0059
0.0044
0.0058
0.0025
0.0060
0.0158

-0.0418
0.0267
0.2901
-0.1378
-0.3541
0.1226
-0.2510
0.2746
0.1850
1.5441

0.9722
3.2346
5.5916
1.8694
3.0825
1.5392
1.4242
3.7877
1.5013
37.8347

-0.0204
-0.0363
-0.0281
-0.0277
-0.0386
-0.0186
-0.0330
-0.0142
-0.0267
-0.1354

0.0161
0.0307
0.0321
0.0186
0.0237
0.0214
0.0213
0.0154
0.0365
0.2043

0.0005
0.0001
0.0003
0.0001
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
0.0002
0.0002
0.0001
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0001
0.0002

0.0002
0.0001
0.0001
0.0002
0.0001
0.0002
0.0002
0.0002
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0003
0.0001

0.0122
0.0104
0.0120
0.0124
0.0115
0.0124
0.0123
0.0136
0.0103
0.0104
0.0093
0.0101
0.0114
0.0162
0.0107

-0.6689
-0.9156
-0.7929
0.0229
-0.0129
-0.4211
-1.0020
-1.6970
-1.3338
-0.5982
-0.8380
-1.2009
-1.0047
-5.0288
-0.1086

16.9013
15.7923
14.3411
4.2746
4.7809
14.4323
17.5142
22.6741
46.6752
5.8876
13.1268
15.4619
16.1028
139.0712
9.2758

-0.1198
-0.1087
-0.1228
-0.0572
-0.0608
-0.1224
-0.1406
-0.1692
-0.1234
-0.0772
-0.0964
-0.0970
-0.1235
-0.3328
-0.0839

0.0938
0.0905
0.0839
0.0908
0.0804
0.1098
0.0857
0.0893
0.1196
0.0571
0.0702
0.0700
0.0859
0.2004
0.0860

0.0039
0.0033
0.0028
0.0021
0.0013
0.0039
0.0013
0.0013

0.0080
0.0066
0.0061
0.0046
0.0026
0.0089
0.0027
0.0024

0.0897
0.0811
0.0778
0.0676
0.0514
0.0944
0.0516
0.0486

2.8966
1.5146
5.6845
1.4815
0.9357
4.6871
1.9100
0.7192

23.8360
7.4302
82.7293
6.3416
4.1828
75.3005
12.0686
5.2409

-0.2591
-0.3526
-0.4633
-0.2147
-0.2333
-0.6371
-0.2105
-0.3419

1.1560
0.6256
1.3577
0.5169
0.3467
1.6543
0.4523
0.3511

0.0024
0.0041
0.0061
0.0047
0.0037
0.0031
0.0065
0.0013
0.0010
0.0048

0.0017
0.0031
0.0048
0.0068
0.0052
0.0028
0.0122
0.0018
0.0027
0.0048

0.0413
0.0555
0.0695
0.0825
0.0721
0.0527
0.1104
0.0430
0.0518
0.0690

-0.0884
0.3155
2.9940
6.5676
5.2549
1.0546
17.1636
1.9896
9.3298
2.1275

6.3974
5.7719
32.9060
119.5223
82.0380
12.0803
524.2052
28.6150
199.0220
20.4872

-0.3717
-0.4235
-0.4189
-0.4601
-0.3957
-0.3720
-0.4025
-0.3793
-0.4203
-0.5111

0.2525
0.3366
0.9642
1.7940
1.3661
0.4737
3.5549
0.5556
1.2426
0.6461

Foreign Exchange
Euro/US Dollar
UK Pound Sterling/US Dollar
US Dollar/Japanese Yen
US Dollar/Swiss Franc
Australian Dollar/US Dollar
US Dollar/Canadian Dollar
New Zealand Dollar/US Dollar
US Dollar/Chinese Renminbi
US Dollar/Swedish Krona
US Dollar/Russian Rouble

Market Index
S&P 500 Index - CBOE
FTSE 100 Index
CAC 40 Index
Hang Seng Index
Nikkei 225 Index
Deutsche Boerse DAX Index
IBEX 35 Index
FTSE MIB Index
TSX-Toronto Stock Exch. 300 Comp.
Shanghai SE Composite Index
Swiss Market Index
S&P/ASX 200
EURO STOXX INDEX
MOEX Russia Index
Korea SE Kospi Index

Volatility Derivative
CBOE Market Volatility Index
EURO STOXX 50 Volatility (VSTOXX)
CBOE Crude Oil Volatility Index
Nikkei Volatility Index
CBOE Gold Volatility Index
CBOE Emerging Markets ETF Vol.
VVIX Index
V-VSTOXX Index

Cryptocurrency
Bitcoin
Ethereum
BNB
Ripple
Cardano
Solano
Dogecoin
Polkadot
Shibu Inu
Polygon

Note: To investigate the influence of financial market products upon CBDC sentiment, we select four distinct types of upon
which we analyse market interactions: i) foreign exchange markets; ii) traditional stock markets; iii) volatility derivatives;
and iv) cryptocurrencies. The listed products that are analysed are selected based on size, as identified by market
capitalisation, and liquidity. Data was obtained from Thomson Reuters Eikon for the period between 1 January 2017 and
30 June 2022. While social media data and cryptocurrency data are available at all times throughout the week, this data
remains unchanged and accounts for 2,060 observations. Markets with structured operational times have weekends
removed, and therefore account for 1,471 observations. Analyses were repeated to both include and exclude weekend social
media data, however results remain unchanged. The results of such analyses are available from the authors upon request.

27

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Table 2: The effects of central bank releases based on CBDC upon related social media sentiment
dt

α1

β1

at

Structure

0.0832***
(0.0027)
0.3701***
(0.0608)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.5340***
(0.0050)

0.0088***
(0.0007)
0.0231***
(0.0006)

GARCH1-1

Central Bank CBDC
LM Analysis
HI Analysis

6.3050***
(0.8060)
2.6380***
(0.0298)

GARCH1-2

P
Note: The GARCH(1,1) methodology used then has the following specification: st = at + j=1 bj st−j + ϕt + dt + εt
where st−j represents the lagged value of the analysed sentiment over time, whereas ϕt represents the performance of the
MSCI World Index, which is used to account for international effects with the methodological structure, while dt represents
an individual dummy variable that takes a value of unity on dates denoted where central banks have released relevant
research and statements. The above analyses is based upon the combined announcements made on the respective websites
of the U.S. Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the Swiss National
Bank, and the Bank of Canada. inclusive of terms relating to "central bank digital currency" and "CBDC" respectively.
Data is further developed as a dummy variable that is used in the described GARCH methodological process. Data is
presented in Figure 3. The presented methodology is selected based on the Akaike Information Criterion and Bayesian
Information Criterion respectively. Results based on all other types of methodological analysis and variety of included data
are available from the authors upon request. ***, ** and * represent significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.

28

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Table 3: The effects of major international incidents on CBDC sentiment

dt

LM Analysis
α1
β1

at

HI Analysis
α1
β1

dt

at

17 November 2019, first unofficial COVID-19 case detected⋆⋆ [Corbet et al., 2020]
D5−day
D10−day
D20−day

0.2990
(1.5410)
0.3420
(1.1610)
1.0550
(1.2330)

0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0824***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0084***
(0.0007)

0.2080
(0.2340)
0.1520
(0.1980)
0.0206
(0.0967)

0.3290***
(0.0318)
0.3260***
(0.0317)
0.3130***
(0.0315)

0.6170***
(0.0048)
0.6170***
(0.0048)
0.6200***
(0.0048)

0.0174***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0172***
(0.0004)

0.6190***
(0.0048)
0.6190***
(0.0048)
0.6190***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)

0.6170***
(0.0048)
0.6190***
(0.0048)
0.6170***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)

0.6180***
(0.0048)
0.6190***
(0.0048)
0.6150***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0175***
(0.0004)

31 December 2019, first official identification of a pandemic by World Heath Org. (WHO)
D5−day
D10−day
D20−day

0.2770
(3.7210)
0.5270
(2.0540)
0.7610
(0.8740)

0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0824***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0084***
(0.0007)

0.0631
(0.1990)
0.0200
(0.1560)
0.0131
(0.1470)

0.3210***
(0.0316)
0.3170***
(0.0315)
0.3200***
(0.0316)

23 January 2020, first Chinese deaths, 1 confirmed as per Johns Hopkins Uni CSSE Data
D5−day
D10−day
D20−day

3.6880***
(1.0590)
1.7520*
0.9930)
1.3930***
(0.5100)

0.0821***
(0.0027)
0.0822***
(0.0027)
0.0822***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0085***
(0.0007)
0.0085***
(0.0007)
0.0085***
(0.0007)

1.2210***
(0.2710)
1.1500***
(0.4080)
1.1150***
(0.0510)

0.3300***
(0.0318)
0.3200***
(0.0316)
0.3290***
(0.0317)

15 February 2020, first European deaths, 1 confirmed as per Johns Hopkins Uni CSSE Data
D5−day
D10−day
D20−day

0.2480
(1.1500)
0.8770
(1.7690)
0.7630***
(0.3580)

0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0824***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0084***
(0.0007)

0.3190
(0.5050)
0.2980
(0.2250)
0.2750***
(0.1040)

0.3220***
(0.0317)
0.3180***
(0.0316)
0.3440***
(0.0322)

2 March 2020, first US deaths, 5 confirmed as per Johns Hopkins Uni CSSE Data
D5−day
D10−day
D20−day

0.5600
(4.0610)
0.4220
(3.3980)
0.8910***
(0.3853)

0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0824***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0084***
(0.0007)

0.5540
(0.7160)
0.4177
(0.3250)
0.4154***
(0.1270)

0.3090***
(0.0313)
0.3070***
(0.0313)
0.3130***
(0.0314)

0.6200***
(0.0047)
0.6210***
(0.0047)
0.6190***
(0.0047)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0172***
(0.0004)
0.0172***
(0.0004)

0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0084***
(0.0007)

-5.0350***
(0.2616)
-10.5300***
(0.4155)
-9.8290***
(0.2768)

0.3210***
(0.0316)
0.3160***
(0.0315)
0.2830***
(0.0307)

0.6190***
(0.0048)
0.6190***
(0.0048)
0.6230***
(0.0047)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0172***
(0.0004)

24 February 2022, start of the Ukraine invasion
D5−day
D10−day
D20−day

-1.9950***
(0.1617)
-1.9500***
(0.1220)
-3.9730***
(0.5600)

0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0823***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

P
Note: The GARCH(1,1) methodology used then has the following specification: st = at + j=1 bj st−j + ϕt + dt + εt
where st−j represents the lagged value of the analysed sentiment over time, whereas ϕt represents the performance of the
MSCI World Index, which is used to account for international effects with the methodological structure, while dt
represents an individual dummy variable that takes a value of one on the dates upon which major crises such as that of the
COVID-19 pandemic and the illegal invasion of Ukraine by Russian forces occur, and is designed to investigate the specific
effects of these events upon CBDC. ⋆⋆ As per Corbet et al. [2020], on the 17 November 2019, the first unofficial COVID-19
case detected was reported by the South China Morning Post. The presented methodology is selected based on the Akaike
Information Criterion and Bayesian Information Criterion respectively. Results based on all other types of methodological
analysis and variety of included data are available from the authors upon request. ***, ** and * represent significance at
the 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.

29

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Table 4: The effects of de-pegging incidents on CBDC sentiment
dt

α1

β1

at

Structure

0.5800***
(0.2532)
0.8900***
(0.3720)
2.8950***
(0.9200)
20.7700***
(0.5780)

0.0830***
(0.0027)
0.0825***
(0.0027)
0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0843***
(0.0027)

0.8460***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8420***
(0.0012)

0.0088***
(0.0008)
0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0130***
(0.0011)

GARCH1-1

0.6400***
(0.1020)
0.7280***
(0.3360)
2.2640***
(0.2280)
8.5950***
(0.1740)

0.2890***
(0.0308)
0.3480***
(0.0322)
0.2690***
(0.0307)
0.1240***
(0.0274)

0.6220***
(0.0048)
0.6140***
(0.0048)
0.6210***
(0.0047)
0.6410***
(0.0046)

0.0172***
(0.0004)
0.0174***
(0.0004)
0.0171***
(0.0004)
0.0166***
(0.0004)

LM Analysis
Depeg Q4
Depeg Q3
Depeg Q2
Depeg Q1

GARCH1-1
GARCH1-1
GARCH1-1

HI Analysis
Depeg Q4
Depeg Q3
Depeg Q2
Depeg Q1

GARCH1-1
GARCH1-1
GARCH1-1
GARCH1-1

Note: In the above table, we present the results of the analysis surrounding the effects of the de-pegging of stablecoins
upon CBDC sentiment. de-pegging refers to a situation where the value of a stablecoin is found to significantly deviate
from its intended peg, therefore, it can be said to be depegged. To establish an exact definition, this research builds upon
a number of de-pegging rules, but found that based on a 10% move away from the stated peg to be most representative of
major events. Results were estimated across a variety of differential rules, however, once de-pegging events beyond 10%
are analysed, results do not present evidence of significant differentials to those presented above. When a de-pegging event
is identified, a dummy variable included in the stated
methodology takes a value of unity. It is then incorporated into a
P
methodological structure of the form: st = at + j=1 bj st−j + ϕt + dt + εt where st−j represents the lagged value of the
analysed sentiment over time, whereas ϕt represents the performance of the MSCI World Index, which is used to account
for international effects with the methodological structure, while dt represents an individual dummy variable that takes a
value of one Q1 through Q4 represent the quartile of respective market capitalisation, where Q1 represents the largest
quartile of stablecoins by size, while Q4 represents the smallest. The presented methodology is selected based on the
Akaike Information Criterion and Bayesian Information Criterion respectively. Results based on all other types of
methodological analysis and variety of included data are available from the authors upon request. ***, ** and * represent
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.

30

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Table 5: Foreign exchange-driven significant volatility influence on CBDC

31

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

dt

LM Analysis
α1
β1

at

dt

HI Analysis
α1
β1

at

EUR/USD - D2.5%

1.9040***
(0.2331)

0.0824***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)

1.2960***
(0.1824)

0.3200***
(0.0316)

0.6190***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)

GBP/USD - D2.5%

1.0704***
(0.3467)

0.0824***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)

0.8123***
(0.3817)

0.3180***
(0.0316)

0.6190***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)

JPY/USD - D2.5%

0.2230
(0.1647)

0.0824***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)

0.2610
(0.1800)

0.3190***
(0.0316)

0.6190***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)

CHF/USD - D2.5%

0.3800
(0.2482)

0.0859***
(0.0028)

0.8440***
(0.0012)

0.0105***
(0.0009)

0.5472
(0.4385)

0.3190***
(0.0316)

0.6190***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)

AUD/USD - D2.5%

0.6855
(1.0200)

0.0825***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0086***
(0.0007)

0.8590
(1.0124)

0.2530***
(0.0301)

0.6280***
(0.0046)

0.0170***
(0.0004)

CAR/USD - D2.5%

0.1599
(0.7742)

0.0824***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)

0.1360
(1.4060)

0.3170***
(0.0316)

0.6190***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)

NZD/USD⋆⋆ - D2.5%

0.0748
(0.0980)

0.4400***
(0.0146)

0.6690***
(0.0049)

0.0185***
(0.0009)

0.0705
(0.5000)

0.3210***
(0.0316)

0.6180***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)

CNY/USD - D2.5%

0.2680
(2.3477)

0.0824***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)

0.1580
(0.1369)

0.3250***
(0.0317)

0.6180***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)

SEK/USD - D2.5%

0.7958
(1.7420)

0.0826***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0086***
(0.0007)

0.7453
(0.6220)

0.3200***
(0.0316)

0.6180***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)

RUB/USD - D2.5%

-1.6070***
(0.3380)

0.0822***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)

-0.9016***
(0.0666)

0.3200***
(0.0320)

0.6180***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)

P
Note: The GARCH(1,1) methodology used then has the following specification: st = at + j=1 bj st−j + ϕt + dt + εt where st−j represents the lagged value
of the analysed sentiment over time, whereas ϕt represents the performance of the MSCI World Index, which is used to account for international effects with
the methodological structure, while dt represents an individual dummy variable that takes a value of one when the stated foreign exchange products are found
to breach absolute returns of 2.5%, indicating a major daily event. ⋆⋆ The analysis based on NZD/USD was best served by a GARCH(1,2) process as selected
based on the Akaike Information Criterion and Bayesian Information Criterion respectively. Results based on all other types of methodological analysis and
variety of included data are available from the authors upon request. ***, ** and * represent significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.

Table 6: Stock Market-driven significant volatility influence on CBDC
LM Analysis
α1
β1

dt

at

dt

HI Analysis
α1
β1

at

S&P 500 Index - CBOE
D2.5%
2.0300***
0.0823
(0.6600)
(0.0027)
D5.0%
4.4280***
0.0825
(1.0660)
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0086***
(0.0007)

0.9133***
(0.1090)
1.6141***
(0.1240)

0.3070***
(0.0313)
0.3110***
(0.0314)

0.6210***
(0.0047)
0.6200***
(0.0047)

0.0171***
(0.0004)
0.0172***
(0.0004)

FTSE 100 Index
D2.5%
0.3354
(0.9710)
D5.0%
0.8055
(1.5390)

0.0825***
(0.0027)
0.0826***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0086***
(0.0007)
0.0086***
(0.0007)

0.5480
(0.4410)
0.5560
(0.4400)

0.3180***
(0.0315)
0.3190***
(0.0316)

0.6190***
(0.0048)
0.6190***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)

CAC 40 Index
D2.5%
0.7110
(0.6150)
D5.0%
0.8015
(1.4910)

0.0821***
(0.0027)
0.0823***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0085***
(0.0007)

0.5660
(0.4143)
0.1490
(0.1426)

0.3200***
(0.0316)
0.3190***
(0.0316)

0.6190***
(0.0048)
0.6190***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)

Hang Seng Index
D2.5%
0.5691
(0.5682)
D5.0%
0.4280
(0.3250)

0.0820***
(0.0072)
0.0823***
(0.0027)

0.7920***
(0.0031)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0112***
(0.0007)
0.0083***
(0.0007)

0.4117
(0.3540)
0.2330
(0.5951)

0.3200***
(0.0316)
0.3180***
(0.0316)

0.6190***
(0.0048)
0.6190
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)

S&P/NZX 50 Index
D2.5%
0.8820
(0.7110)
D5.0%
0.7347
(1.8870)

0.0823***
(0.0027)
0.0823***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0084***
(0.0007)

0.1170
(0.1900)
0.1520
(0.1680)

0.3170***
(0.0316)
0.3160***
(0.0315)

0.6190***
(0.0048)
0.6190***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0172***
(0.0004)

Deutsche Boerse DAX Index
D2.5%
0.3923
0.0824***
(0.9380)
(0.0027)
D5.0%
0.8361
0.0824***
(1.5410)
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0086***
(0.0007)
0.0085***
(0.0007)

0.3370
(0.2600)
0.1990
(0.4300)

0.3130***
(0.0315)
0.3170***
(0.0316)

0.6200***
(0.0048)
0.6190***
(0.0048)

0.0172***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)

IBEX 35 Index
D2.5%
0.3850
(0.9110)
D5.0%
0.5117
(1.1370)

0.0825***
(0.0027)
0.0825***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0086***
(0.0007)
0.0086***
(0.0007)

0.3840
(0.2760)
0.3650
(0.2770)

0.3170***
(0.0315)
0.3160***
(0.0315)

0.6190***
(0.0048)
0.6190***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)

FTSE MIB Index
D2.5%
0.7630
(0.5820)
D5.0%
1.5050
(1.1150)

0.0820***
(0.0027)
0.0825***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0084***
(0.0007)
0.0086***
(0.0007)

0.1190
(0.1010)
0.2930
(0.1760)

0.3140***
(0.0315)
0.3000***
(0.0311)

0.6200***
(0.0048)
0.6220***
(0.0047)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0171***
(0.0004)

TSX-Toronto Stock Exchange 300 Composite Index
D2.5%
0.4850
0.0825***
0.8470***
0.0085***
(0.8250)
(0.0027)
(0.0011)
(0.0007)
D5.0%
0.5310
0.0825***
0.8470***
0.0086***
(1.0690)
(0.0027)
(0.0011)
(0.0007)

0.1550
(0.1060)
0.3030
(0.1780)

0.3140***
(0.0315)
0.3030***
(0.0312)

0.6200***
(0.0048)
0.6210***
(0.0047)

0.0172***
(0.0004)
0.0171***
(0.0004)

0.2820***
(0.1170)
0.4577***
(0.2175)

0.3190***
(0.0319)
0.3190***
(0.0316)

0.6190***
(0.0048)
0.6190***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)

Shanghai SE Composite Index
D2.5%
5.1030***
0.2830***
(1.0700)
(0.0099)
D5.0%
3.1540***
0.0824***
(1.0971)
(0.0027)

0.7430***
(0.0037)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0129***
(0.0008)
0.0084***
(0.0007)

P
Note: The GARCH(1,1) methodology used then has the following specification: st = at + j=1 bj st−j + ϕt + dt + εt
where st−j represents the lagged value of the analysed sentiment over time, whereas ϕt represents the performance of the
MSCI World Index, which is used to account for international effects with the methodological structure, while dt
represents an individual dummy variable that takes a value of one when the stated foreign exchange products are found to
breach absolute returns of 2.5% and 5.0% respectively, indicating a major daily event. ⋆⋆ The denoted analyses were best
served by either a GARCH(1,2), GARCH(2,1), or GARCH(2,2)
32 process as selected based on the Akaike Information
Criterion and Bayesian Information Criterion respectively. Results based on other stated countries in Table 1, and all other
types of methodological analysis and variety of included data are excluded for brevity of presentation, however they are
each available from the authors upon request. ***, ** and * represent significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Table 7: Volatility derivative-driven significant volatility influence on CBDC

dt

LM Analysis
α1
β1

HI Analysis
α1
β1

at

dt

0.0084***
(0.0012)
0.0024*
(0.0014)

0.1990***
(0.0090)
0.4860***
(0.0085)

0.3230***
(0.0348)
0.3460***
(0.0350)

0.6170***
(0.0051)
0.6140***
(0.0050)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0166***
(0.0004)

EURO STOXX 50 Volatility (VSTOXX) EUR Price Index
D5.0%
0.2040***
0.0832***
0.8450***
0.0107***
(0.0708)
(0.0028)
(0.0012)
(0.0010)
D10.0%
0.3500***
0.0847***
0.8440***
0.0098***
(0.0630)
(0.0031)
(0.0013)
(0.0011)

0.6420***
(0.0082)
0.5850***
(0.0074)

0.2290***
(0.0348)
0.2970***
(0.0331)

0.6301***
(0.0051)
0.6210***
(0.0049)

0.0153***
(0.0006)
0.0162***
(0.0005)

CBOE Crude Oil Volatility Index
D5.0%
0.5840***
0.1930***
(0.0298)
(0.0068)
D10.0% ⋆⋆
1.1950***
0.6270***
(0.0160)
(0.0217)

0.7910***
(0.0025)
0.6130***
(0.0056)

0.0049***
(0.0016)
0.0204***
(0.0022)

0.6153***
(0.0107)
0.7690***
(0.0131)

0.3180***
(0.0321)
0.3340***
(0.0319)

0.6190***
(0.0049)
0.6160***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)

Nikkei Volatility Index
D5.0%
0.6186***
(0.0484)
D10.0% ⋆⋆
0.9610***
(0.0139)

0.0820***
(0.0028)
0.4870***
(0.0196)

0.8470***
(0.0012)
0.6510***
(0.0066)

0.0089***
(0.0011)
0.0528***
(0.0046)

0.2300***
(0.0114)
0.4061***
(0.0114)

0.3280***
(0.0346)
0.3090***
(0.0348)

0.6180***
(0.0050)
0.6200***
(0.0051)

0.0168***
(0.0005)
0.0173***
(0.0004)

CBOE Gold Volatility Index
D5.0%
0.3230***
0.0839***
(0.0633)
(0.0029)
D10.0%
0.2290***
0.0838***
(0.1030)
(0.0028)

0.8450***
(0.0012)
0.8460***
(0.0011)

0.0089***
(0.0009)
0.0086***
(0.0008)

0.8420***
(0.0070)
0.6102***
(0.0091)

0.3280***
(0.0339)
0.3280***
(0.0327)

0.6170***
(0.0048)
0.6170***
(0.0048)

0.0146***
(0.0004)
0.0173***
(0.0004)

CBOE Emerging Markets ETF Volatility Index
D5.0% ⋆⋆
0.4680***
0.2010***
0.7870***
(0.0238)
(0.0068)
(0.0024)
D10.0% ⋆⋆
0.6280***
0.2130***
0.7810***
(0.0239)
(0.0073)
(0.0026)

0.0037***
(0.0015)
0.0035***
(0.0012)

0.5250***
(0.0073)
0.5553***
(0.0091)

0.3120***
(0.0364)
0.3000***
(0.0362)

0.6190***
(0.0053)
0.6190***
(0.0051)

0.0170***
(0.0004)
0.0168***
(0.0004)

The VVIX Index
D5.0% ⋆⋆
0.5090***
(0.0303)
D10.0% ⋆⋆
0.6090***
(0.0350)

0.1980***
(0.0066)
0.2040***
(0.0068)

0.7870***
(0.0024)
0.7850***
(0.0024)

0.0057***
(0.0021)
0.0065***
(0.0015)

0.5156***
(0.0116)
0.5438***
(0.0095)

0.3690***
(0.0344)
0.3020***
(0.0333)

0.6110***
(0.0051)
0.6080***
(0.0048)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0169***
(0.0004)

The V-VSTOXX Index
D5.0% ⋆⋆
0.5930***
(0.0271)
D10.0%
0.6064***
(0.0752)

0.2150***
(0.0077)
0.0825***
(0.0028)

0.7790***
(0.0030)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0039***
(0.0020)
0.0088***
(0.0007)

0.6267***
(0.0056)
0.6139***
(0.0106)

0.3280***
(0.0313)
0.3170***
(0.0323)

0.6190***
(0.0047)
0.6200***
(0.0049)

0.0151***
(0.0004)
0.0171***
(0.0004)

CBOE Market Volatility Index
D5.0%
0.3380***
0.0848***
(0.0597)
(0.0029)
⋆⋆
0.5860***
0.2150***
D10.0%
(0.0214)
(0.0068)

0.8450***
(0.0012)
0.7800***
(0.0024)

at

P
Note: The GARCH(1,1) methodology used then has the following specification: st = at + j=1 bj st−j + ϕt + dt + εt
where st−j represents the lagged value of the analysed sentiment over time, whereas ϕt represents the performance of the
MSCI World Index, which is used to account for international effects with the methodological structure, while dt
represents an individual dummy variable that takes a value of one when the stated foreign exchange products are found to
breach absolute returns of 5.0% and 10.0% respectively, indicating a major daily event. ⋆⋆ The denoted analyses were best
served by either a GARCH(1,2), GARCH(2,1), or GARCH(2,2) process as selected based on the Akaike Information
Criterion and Bayesian Information Criterion respectively. Results based on all other types of methodological analysis and
variety of included data are available from the authors upon request. ***, ** and * represent significance at the 1%, 5%
and 10%, respectively.

33

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

Table 8: Cryptocurrency-driven significant volatility influence on CBDC

dt

LM Analysis
α1
β1

at

dt

HI Analysis
α1
β1

at

Bitcoin (BTC)
D5.0%
0.0844***
(0.0322)
D10.0%
0.3630***
(0.1160)

0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0826***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0085***
(0.0008)
0.0082***
(0.0008)

0.0517***
(0.0056)
0.2827***
(0.0069)

0.3770***
(0.0352)
0.3440***
(0.0368)

0.6050***
(0.0051)
0.5870***
(0.0051)

0.0161***
(0.0004)
0.0157***
(0.0004)

Ethereum (ETH)
D5.0%
0.0767***
(0.0073)
D10.0%
0.0459***
(0.0093)

0.0824***
(0.0027)
0.0823***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0089***
(0.0008)
0.0087***
(0.0007)

0.0520***
(0.0066)
0.0570***
(0.0066)

0.2850***
(0.0297)
0.3330***
(0.0303)

0.6230***
(0.0046)
0.6160***
(0.0046)

0.0160***
(0.0005)
0.0161***
(0.0004)

BNB (BNB)
D5.0%
0.0911***
(0.0148)
D10.0%
0.0968***
(0.0169)

0.0822***
(0.0027)
0.0823***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0087***
(0.0008)
0.0085***
(0.0007)

0.0147***
(0.0056)
0.0230***
(0.0065)

0.3370***
(0.0326)
0.3340***
(0.0333)

0.6160***
(0.0049)
0.6170***
(0.0049)

0.0173***
(0.0004)
0.0172***
(0.0004)

Ripple (XRP)
D5.0%
0.0844***
(0.0171)
D10.0%
0.0772***
(0.0183)

0.0818***
(0.0026)
0.0819***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0083***
(0.0008)
0.0084***
(0.0007)

0.0150***
(0.0061)
0.0279***
(0.0096)

0.3320***
(0.0324)
0.3730***
(0.0331)

0.6180***
(0.0048)
0.6120***
(0.0049)

0.0169***
(0.0004)
0.0167***
(0.0005)

Cardano (ADA)
D5.0%
0.2350***
(0.0399)
D10.0%
0.2860***
(0.0401)

0.0827***
(0.0028)
0.0836***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0012)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0083***
(0.0008)
0.0074***
(0.0008)

0.0544***
(0.0059)
0.0404***
(0.0062)

0.3150***
(0.0317)
0.3160***
(0.0326)

0.6200***
(0.0048)
0.6210***
(0.0049)

0.0172***
(0.0004)
0.0164***
(0.0004)

Solano (SOL)
D5.0%
0.2749***
(0.1040)
D10.0%
0.2950***
(0.1198)

0.0811***
(0.0026)
0.0820***
(0.0027)

0.8480***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0085***
(0.0007)
0.0089***
(0.0008)

0.3110***
(0.0223)
0.3300***
(0.0237)

0.3410***
(0.0359)
0.4290***
(0.0344)

0.5410***
(0.0048)
0.5580***
(0.0049)

0.0208***
(0.0005)
0.0200***
(0.0005)

Dogecoin (DOGE)
D5.0% ⋆⋆
0.0815***
(0.0273)
⋆⋆
D10.0%
0.0750***
(0.0285)

0.0822***
(0.0027)
0.0820***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0083***
(0.0008)
0.0086***
(0.0007)

0.1460***
(0.0070)
0.1010***
(0.0058)

0.3640***
(0.0343)
0.2120***
(0.0314)

0.6130***
(0.0050)
0.6340***
(0.0048)

0.0171***
(0.0004)
0.0133***
(0.0004)

Polkadot (DOT)
D5.0%
0.2371
(0.2030)
D10.0%
0.2759
(0.2320)

0.0839***
(0.0027)
0.0860***
(0.0029)

0.8440***
(0.0012)
0.8420***
(0.0013)

0.0123***
(0.0010)
0.0132***
(0.0011)

0.1605
(0.1490)
0.1792
(0.1820)

0.5930***
(0.0702)
0.6280***
(0.0715)

0.3460***
(0.0062)
0.3140***
(0.0056)

0.0248***
(0.0006)
0.0261***
(0.0006)

Shibu Inu (SHIB)
D5.0%
0.2732
(0.8430)
D10.0%
0.2673
(1.0060)

0.0829***
(0.0027)
0.0838***
(0.0027)

0.8460***
(0.0011)
0.8450***
(0.0011)

0.0098***
(0.0008)
0.0097***
(0.0008)

0.1123
(0.1150)
0.1130
(0.1130)

0.3110***
(0.0323)
0.5080***
(0.0740)

0.6110***
(0.0049)
0.3390***
(0.0063)

0.0176***
(0.0004)
0.0301***
(0.0007)

Polygon (MATIC)
D5.0%
1.0340
(0.8910)
D10.0%
0.9430
(1.1400)

0.0817***
(0.0029)
0.0823***
(0.0027)

0.8470***
(0.0011)
0.8470***
(0.0011)

0.0083***
(0.0007)
0.0086***
(0.0007)

0.1380
(0.0821)
0.0978
(0.0887)

0.3270***
(0.0342)
0.3790***
(0.0334)

0.5850***
(0.0049)
0.5900***
(0.0048)

0.0165***
(0.0004)
0.0164***
(0.0004)

P
Note: The GARCH(1,1) methodology used then has the following specification: st = at + j=1 bj st−j + ϕt + dt + εt
where st−j represents the lagged value of the analysed sentiment over time, whereas ϕt represents the performance of the
MSCI World Index, which is used to account for international effects with the methodological structure, while dt
represents an individual dummy variable that takes a value of one when the stated foreign exchange products are found to
breach absolute returns of 5.0% and 10.0% respectively, indicating a major daily event. ⋆⋆ The denoted analyses were best
served by either a GARCH(1,2), GARCH(2,1), or GARCH(2,2)
34 process as selected based on the Akaike Information
Criterion and Bayesian Information Criterion respectively. Results based on all other types of methodological analysis and
variety of included data are available from the authors upon request. ***, ** and * represent significance at the 1%, 5%
and 10%, respectively.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4205402

