EDITOR NIR KSHETRI

University of North Carolina at Greensboro;
nbkshetr@uncg.edu

COMPUTING’S ECONOMICS

COPYRIGHT ISTOCKPHOTO, CREDIT: SITTIPONG PHOKAWATTANA

The Economics of
Central Bank Digital
Currency
Nir Kshetri, University of North Carolina at Greensboro

Central bank digital currency (CBDC) is emerging
as the future of banking and payments. We
analyze CBDCs’ benefits to consumers and the
economy and some concerns associated
with their use.

T

he current trend of central bank activities
clearly shows that central bank digital currency (CBDC) is likely to be the future of banking and payments. In late 2020, the international financial institution owned by central banks,
Bank for International Settlements (BIS), surveyed more
than 60 central banks about their engagement in digital
versions of fiat currency work and found that 86% were
exploring CBDCs.1 In October 2020, Central Bank of the
Bahamas (CBB) launched the digital Bahamian Dollar
(B$), known as “the sand dollar,” which was the world’s
first CBDC.2 Parties transacting in the sand dollar benefit from the legal-tender status since it uses a liability of
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MC.2021.3070091
Date of current version: 4 June 2021

CO M PUTE R 0018-9162/ 21©2021IEEE

the CBB, which is viewed as the safest form of payment in the country.
Major world economies such as
Brazil, China, the Eurozone, Japan,
Russia, the United Kingdom, and
the United States are undergoing
various phases of research exploration and trial of CBDCs.3 CBDCs utilize different models and widely differ in terms of factors such as target users and the types
of technologies used. China’s digital yuan, or e-CNY, for
instance, is being tested for retail use by the public. Other
economies, such as Hong Kong4 and Australia, are developing CBDCs targeted at financial institutions. In November 2020, Australia’s central bank and banknote-issuing
authority, the Reserve Bank of Australia, announced a
partnership with multinational bank Commonwealth
Bank of Australia, another bank serving Australia National Australia Bank, investment and trustee group
Perpetual, and blockchain company ConsenSys to explore the potential use and implications of a wholesale
form of distributed ledger technology (DLT)-based CBDC.
The project’s goal was to develop a proof-of-concept
(PoC) based on an Ethereum-based platform for issuing a
tokenized form of CBDC for the wholesale market,
PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIET Y

JUNE 2021

53

COMPUTING’S ECONOMICS

which involves borrowing and lending among institutional banks.5
Ripple, which is a semicentralized
system,6 is also being viewed as a
platform for developing, issuing, and
managing CBDCs. Quoting a report of
the professional accounting body, CPA
Australia, media outlets reported that
France’s central bank, the Banque de
France, has shown interest in exploring Ripple as a platform for issuing
its CBDC.7
In November 2020, the central
banks of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates (UAE) concluded a joint
CBDC PoC, referred to as the “Aber”
project. The project was launched in
January 2019.8 The goal was to test the
viability of a shared digital currency
between the two countries. The project
used Hyperledger Fabric, which is a permissioned blockchain associated with
Linux Foundation and IBM. In addition
to the two central banks, six local commercial banks participated to run the
nodes.9 A key finding was that, compared to centralized payment systems,
the use of DLT can improve domestic
and cross-border commercial bank
settlements.10 The Aber project built
on earlier trials conducted in other

countries, such as Singapore’s Project
Ubin and Canada’s Project Jasper.11

BENEFITS TO CONSUMERS
AND THE ECONOMY

Some of the key potential benefits of
CBDCs vis-à-vis fiat currencies and
other payment systems are presented
in Table 1. They are also illustrated in
the case of e-CNY, also commonly referred to by its original project name,
Digital Currency Electronic Payment
(DCEP), which is in the most advanced
stage of development among CBDC
projects of major economies.
It is worth noting that the relative
importance of different benefits varies
across economies. A BIS survey of 63
central banks [41 in emerging market
economies (EMEs) and 22 in advanced
economies] found that EMEs value domestic payments’ efficiency and financial inclusion as the top two benefits of
CBDCs. On one hand, cross-border payments’ efficiency was the least important benefit for EMEs. Central banks in
advanced economies, on the other hand,
viewed payments’ safety and financial
stability as CBDCs’ primary benefits. Financial inclusion was considered to be
the least important factor by this group.12

RELIABLE LOW-RISK
PAYMENT SOLUTION

A state-backed digital currency is the
most reliable means to carry out payment settlements. In a CBDC transaction, just like in an exchange of
banknotes, as soon as the possession
changes, a final settlement is reached
between the parties. With transactions, such as cashless payments by
credit card, wire, check, and digital
apps, a deal is not fully settled when
one party makes a payment to another.
That is, until the banks have recorded,
reconciled, and settled their respective debits and credits, there is a possibility that the transaction could be
reversed.13 In China, for instance, Alipay and WeChat Pay rely on commercial banks to settle payments.14 Parties
that rely on private companies such as
Alipay and WeChat Pay face risks, such
as business failure and bankruptcy of
companies in payment ecosystems.

LOW COSTS AND
HIGH EFFICIENCY

Parties in a transaction may achieve
high efficiency and low costs with
CBDCs. Eliminating intermediaries
could be a key mechanism to reduce

TABLE 1. The key benefits of CBDC to consumers and the national economy.
Benefit

Explanation

The case of DCEP/e-CNY

Reliable low-risk
payment solution

• There are more reliable means to carry out
payment settlements compared to other
available means.

• Private companies such as Alipay and WeChat Pay
face risks such as business failure and bankruptcy.

Low costs and high
efficiency

• There are faster transactions at lower costs.

• It is likely to be free for vendors to accept e-CNY
payments.

Promoting
financial inclusion
of disadvantaged
groups

• For a digital wallet linked to the CBDC account
through application programming interfaces,
no account in a bank is needed to engage in
transactions.
• Traceability and the possibility of conducting
transactions without a smartphone can promote
financial inclusion of disadvantaged groups.

• People’s Bank of China can monitor the flow of
money and deliver targeted programs to improve
the well-being of high-risk/disadvantaged groups.
• The December 2020 Suzhou trial involved offline
payments.

Combating
economic crimes
and frauds

• They are more traceable than fiat currencies and
other payment systems for the government.
• Blockchain-based cryptocurrencies employ
cryptography.
• Blockchains are likely to be permissioned, which
is another defense layer.

• It is described as “controllable anonymity” and is
expected to control money laundering, terrorism
financing, and tax evasion.
• It employs asymmetric cryptography.

54

COMPUTER 

W W W.CO M P U T E R .O R G /CO M P U T E R

transaction costs. The vendors are required to pay a service fee when consumers use e-payment systems such as
WeChat Pay and Alipay or credit cards.
In China, the fee is usually 0.6% of the
total amount.15 The Chinese government has indicated that it will be free
for vendors to accept e-CNY payments.
In Table 2, we compare the throughputs of some major payment systems in
terms of transactions per second (TPS).
Specifically, this table compares the
throughputs of China’s DCEP, Ripple (being considered by the Banque de France),
Hyperledger Fabric (used by the Aber
project of the central banks of Saudi Arabia and the UAE), and Ethereum (used to
develop a PoC by the Reserve Bank of
Australia) with some other crypto and
noncrypto payment solutions.
The CBDCs being planned by major
economies are expected to perform
well in terms of throughput (Table 2).
China’s DCEP is expected to potentially have much higher transaction
processing rates than other CBDCs.
Ripple’s CBDC Private Ledger, which
is built for issuing currencies, uses the
same technology that has powered the
ledger for its digital currency, XRP.16
The firm reported that it is in discussion with central banks worldwide
to assess how its CBDC private ledger
can be used to issue digital currency.
As to the mechanisms needed for
various CBDCs to interact, Ripple has
advocated for the use of its cryptocurrency XRP as a bridge or a vehicle to
efficiently move from the value from
one CBDC to another in a frictionless
manner.17 Likewise, Ethereum is currently in the process of upgrading to
Ethereum 2.0, which is expected to increase speeds to 100,000 TPS.18

PROMOTING THE
FINANCIAL INCLUSION OF
DISADVANTAGED GROUPS

In the current system, checking and
savings accounts with financial institutions are the primary means to
gaining access to credit. In developing
economies, financial institutions are
not easily accessible. Opening a bank

account in developing as well as developed countries may involve a number
of barriers, such as formal identification, a minimum deposit and balance,
and a local bank branch.19
Commercial banks often find it
unprofitable to serve poor people
and small businesses in remote and
marginalized regions. Moreover, if
the majority of consumers start using electronic and digital payments,
such as online/mobile payments and

the establishment of an inclusive digital payment ecosystem and the creation of financial data identities. For
instance, individuals can have a CBDC
account on the central bank’s ledger.
A digital wallet application linked to
the CBDC account through application
programming interfaces can allow users to access their accounts and engage
in transactions.19
CBDCs can thus promote financial
inclusion of low-income groups and

A state-backed digital currency is the most reliable
means to carry out payment settlements.
digital wallets, the infrastructure for
cash payments may suffer, and cash
might no longer be an option in these
regions. Such a situation might lead to
further marginalization of the poor.
The International Monetary Fund
argues that digital currency offers
great promise to reaching disadvantaged groups.20 A retail CBDC system,
in which a central bank issues digital
currency directly to people without
the need for traditional bank accounts,
can address many of the previous challenges. This can be achieved through

small and medium enterprises.6 For instance, since e-CNY is highly traceable,
the central bank, PBoC, can monitor
the flow of money in the Chinese economy.15 This allows the government to
deliver targeted programs to improve
the well-being of high-risk and disadvantaged groups, such as small businesses and low-income households.
Viewed from the perspective of the
rural low-income population, the trial
conducted in December 2020 in city of
Suzhou in the Jiangsu Province in eastern China deserves mentioning. The

TABLE 2. The efficiency and performance indicators
of some major payment systems.29,30
Payment
system

TPS

Remarks

DCEP

About 220,000

December 2019, peak TPS31

Ripple

Average: 1,50032

CBDC private ledger: Ripple claimed that it can
handle tens of thousands of TPS in the initial
phase, which can be increased to hundreds of
thousands of TPS over time

Bitcoin

Average: 5.15

Complete decentralization has reduced
performance

Ethereum

Average: 20

Ethereum 2.0 has an expected 100,000 TPS

Hyperledger
Fabric

Average: 3,500

Deployed in a single cloud data center (early 2018)

Visa

Average: 1,700

Can handle more at peak load

Diem

Average: about 3
(January 2021)33

In the testing phase, testnet
Original Libra white paper envisioned 1,000 TPS34

JUNE 2021

55

COMPUTING’S ECONOMICS

trial involved e-CNY’s offline payments
without smartphones. It explored mechanisms that allow the completion of
transactions by touching two devices via
near-field communication (NFC). Since
one-third of China’s population lacks
Internet access, this trial is important
to understanding the opportunity of expanding e-CNY in rural China.

COMBATING ECONOMIC
CRIMES AND FRAUDS

Compared to a fiat currency, digital currencies are difficult to counterfeit.21 CBDCs that are supported with blockchain
employ complex cryptography to prevent double spending. This is the digital
equivalent of preventing the making of
an identical copy of a banknote. Blockchains used for CBDCs are likely to be
permissioned, which restricts the access to only authorized users, providing
another layer of defense.22
While China’s DCEP does not necessarily use blockchain, it employs
asymmetric cryptography to enhance
security.23 The PBoC has stated that transaction records are encrypted, and unauthorized parties cannot access them.
Governments are also likely to use
CBDCs to combat economic crimes. At
a BIS seminar, the director-general of
the PBoC’s digital currency institute
Mu Changchun proposed global rules,
which emphasize the importance of
synchronizing the flows of information and funds so that regulators can
monitor the compliance of transactions.24 A PBoC official noted that
the DCEP’s “controllable anonymity,”
rather than full anonymity, is based on
international consensus to satisfy antimoney laundering, antiterrorism financing, and antitax-evasion requirements.25 By tracking and recording the
details of all transactions, the government is in a better position to prevent
and control illegal transactions.

PRIVACY VIOLATION AND
SURVEILLANCE-RELATED
CONCERNS

While the aforementioned benefits
are attractive, CBDCs may also present
56

COMPUTER 

some risks to consumers. Privacy is
among the biggest concerns that critics have about CBDCs. From the privacy
standpoint, there are at least three issues that need to be considered. First,
CBDC transactions are not likely to
be fully anonymous. Making data
anonymous means preventing the
identification of parties engaged in a
transaction using special techniques.
CBDCs, such as the DCEP, and decentralized cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin, differ in terms of who is intended
to be prevented from identifying the
parties in a transaction. For instance,
both parties in a transaction involving
DCEP can be anonymous to the public.
DCEP thus provides a higher degree of
anonymity when it comes to the ability
of parties other than the Chinese government to identify the participants
in a transaction. DCEP transactions,
however, can be monitored by the
PBoC. The e-CNY has users’ personal
information and other details to track
and record every movement, such as
where it is stored and how it is spent.
Second, when users’ financial information is centralized, it can potentially be misused by the government.
Such information is also likely to be
targeted by cybercriminals.26
Third, there is a possibility that
consumer data are shared with third
parties. In a 2020 report on CBDC,
published by the central banks of the
United States, Europe, England, Japan,
Switzerland, Canada, and Sweden, and
the BIS,27 there was discussion of the
possibility of allowing service providers
to access consumer data, and to charge
them a fee would be a way to cover the
cost of a CBDC system. In China, e-CNY
is expected to provide commercial
banks with rich transaction data to profile a larger number of consumers and
analyze their online behavior. They can
thus experiment with different ways to
monetize consumer data.28

W

hile CBDCs’ benefits such
as the low cost of producing and storing, ease of use,

and protection against counterfeiting
are obvious, they can also reduce transaction costs by removing third-party
intermediaries such as commercial
banks. They can address various barriers to financial inclusion. CBDCs can
also be issued in a pro-poor manner.
For instance, consumers involved in
an e-CNY trial completed transactions
with NFC technology, which did not require an Internet connection. The possibility of using DCEP with NFC is especially attractive for individuals and
organizations in remote areas who lack
Internet access or bank accounts. Countries that have created financial data
identities can ensure higher efficiency
and value addition from CBDC efforts.
CBDCs may adversely affect the
businesses of financial and payment
intermediaries, such as mobile and
on line payment platforms, banks,
and microfinance institutions. In
China, for instance, e-CNY may pose
a direct challenge to the existing payment systems, such as WeChat Pay
and Alipay.
From the consumers’ standpoint, a
downside of CBDCs is that the government is likely to track all transactions.
Privacy concerns are even more salient
in authoritarian regimes, given their
aim of maintaining social control at all
costs. For instance, among key driving
forces in the development of the DCEP
is, arguably, the Chinese Communist
Party’s (CCP) desire of social control.
The CCP has regarded its centralized
banking system as a key instrument
of its economic power. By putting every transaction onto the PBoC’s radar,
the DCEP may strengthen the surveillance state.

REFERENCES

1. C. Boar and A. Wehrli. “Ready,
steady, go? Results of the third BIS
survey on central bank digital currency.” 2021. Bank for International
Settlements. https://www.bis.org/
publ/bppdf/bispap114.pdf
2. V. Bharathan. “Central Bank Digital
Currency: The first nationwide CBDC
in the world has been launched by
W W W.CO M P U T E R .O R G /CO M P U T E R

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

The Bahamas.” Forbes. 2020. https://
tinyurl.com/yvz9sdpu
J. Light. “Federal reserve’s digital dollar push worries Wall
Street.” Bloomberg. 2021.
https://www.bloomberg.com/
news/articles/2021-03-22/
federal-reserve-s-digital-dollar
-momentum-worries-wall-street
M. Lim. “4 central banks and BIS
exploring CBDC bridge for Asia and
Middle East.” Forkast. 2021. https://
forkast.news/central-banks-bis
-cbdc-bridge-asia-middle-east/
“Reserve Bank partners with Commonwealth Bank, National Australia
Bank, Perpetual and ConsenSys
Software on Wholesale Central Bank
Digital Currency Research Project.”
Reserve Bank of Australia. 2020.
https://www.rba.gov.au/media
-releases/2020/mr-20-27.html
S. Allen et al. “Design choices for
Central Bank Digital Currency:
Policy and technical considerations.”
Brookings. 2020. https://www
.brookings.edu/wp-content/
uploads/2020/07/Design-Choices
-for-CBDC_Final-for-web.pdf
G. Thompson. “Hosting a CBDC?
Only one of Bitcoin, Ethereum or
XRP can do it, says report.” Cointelegraph. 2021. https://cointelegraph
.com/news/hosting-a-cbdc-only
-one-of-bitcoin-ethereum-or-xrp
-can-do-it-says-report
“A statement launching ‘Aber’
project, the common digital
currency between Saudi Arabian
Monetary Authority (SAMA) and
Central Bank of the United Arab
Emirates (CBUAE).” Central Bank
of the UAE. 2019. https://www.
centralbank.ae/sites/default/
files/2019-01/A%20statement%20
launching%20%E2%80%9CAber%E2%80%9D%20project-%20
29Jan2019.pdf
D. Kuhn. “Bilateral Saudi, UAE
digital currency experiment shows
benefits of distributed ledgers,
Central Banks Say.” Coindesk.
2020. https://www.coindesk.com/
bilateral-saudi-uae-digital

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

-currency-experiment-shows
-benefits-of-distributed-ledgers
-central-banks-say
“Saudi Central Bank and Central
Bank of the U.A.E. joint digital
currency and distributed ledger
project.” Saudi Arabian Monetary
Authority. https://www.sama
.gov.sa/en-US/News/Documents/
Project_Aber_report-EN.pdf
(accessed Mar. 4, 2021).
D. Ngetich. “Central Banks of UAE
and Saudi Arabia say CBDCs are
more efficient and can preserve
privacy.” BTC Manager. 2020.
https://btcmanager.com/
central-banks-uae-saudi-arabia
-say-cbdc-preserve-privacy/
C. Barontini and H. Holden. “Proceeding with caution—a survey
on central bank digital currency.”
Bank for International Studies. 2019.
https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/
bispap101.pdf
M. J. Casey. “Why the U.S.
shouldn’t let China dominate the
digital currency race.” Fortune.
2020. https://fortune.com/2020/
04/07/china-us-digital-currency
-coronavirus/
A. Kharpal. “China has given away
millions in its digital Yuan trials.
This is how it works.” CNBC. 2021.
https://www.cnbc.com/2021/03/05/
chinas-digital-yuan-what-is-it-and
-how-does-it-work.html
X. Huang. “China’s DCEP project
launches biggest digital Yuan test
yet.” Forkast. 2021. https://
forkast.news/china-dcep-digital
-yuan-pros-cons/
R. Steves. “France eyes ripple’s
CBDC ledger for digital euro.”
Finance Feeds. 2021. https://
financefeeds.com/france-eyes-ripples
-cbdc-ledger-digital-euro/
“Ripple touts private version of XRP
ledger as CBDC problem-solver.” Finextra. 2021. https://www.finextra.com/
newsarticle/37605/ripple-touts-private
-version-of-xrp-ledger-as-cbdc
-problem-solver
C. Kim. “Confessions of a sharding
skeptic.” Coindesk. 2020. https://

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

www.coindesk.com/sharding-eth-2
-podcast
N. Raghuveera. “Central bank
digital currency can contribute
to financial inclusion but cannot
solve its root causes.” Atlantic
Council. 2020. https://tinyurl
.com/4x3ec3f4
C. Lagarde. “Winds of change:
The case for new digital currency.”
International Monetary Fund. 2018.
https://tinyurl.com/2wyhrh7h
S. Malwa. “Facebook’s Diem Testnet
hits 50 million transactions.” Decrypt. 2021. https://decrypt
.co/55814/facebooks-diem-testnet
-hits-50-million-transactions
A. Linuma. “Facebook’s Libra: Potential to increase demand for Bitcoin.”
Forbes. 2019. https://www.forbes.
com/sites/forbesagencycouncil/
2019/07/17/facebooks-libra-potential
-to-increase-dem a nd-f or-bitcoi n/
?sh=21b91da375cb
“Is DCEP Crypto? Industry experts
discuss China.” Medium. 2020.
https://tinyurl.com/2ykd59jr
T. Wilson and M. Jones. “China
­proposes global rules for central
bank digital currencies.” Reuters.
2021. https://www.reuters.com/
article/cenbanks-digital-china
-rules-idINKBN2BH2CJ
W. Zhao. “PBoC official says ‘completely anonymous CBDC is not an
option.’” The Block Crypto. 2021.
https://www.theblockcrypto.com/
linked/98925/pboc-anonymous-cbdc
-not-option
A. Madeira. “Much anticipated
Central Bank digital currencies raise
privacy concerns.” Coin Telegraph.
2020. https://cointelegraph.com/
news/much-anticipated-central
-bank-digital-currencies-raise
-privacy-concerns
“Central bank digital currencies:
Foundational principles and core
features.” Bank for International
Settlements. 2020. https://www.bis
.org/publ/othp33.pdf
“China and the future of
money—Central Bank Digital
Currency (CBDC).” Money Morning.
JUNE 2021

57

COMPUTING’S ECONOMICS

2021. https://tinyurl.com
/3vkerrjb
29. L. Mearian, “MIT’s blockchain-based ‘Spider’ offers 4X faster
cryptocurrency processing,” ComputerWorld, Feb. 3, 2020. Accessed:
Mar. 15, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.computerworld.com/
article/3518893/mits-blockchain
-based-spider-offers-4x-faster
-cryptocurrency-processing
.html
30. “Behind the architecture of hyperledger fabric.” IBM. 2018. https://
tinyurl.com/5bapt3jw
31. “China may slash yuan/greenback
usage gap with digital currency

technology.” Global Times. 2019.
https://tinyurl.com/v65466vm
32. “Who scales it best? Inside blockchains’ ongoing
transactions-per-second race.”
Cointelegraph. 2019. https://tinyurl
.com/yesfvusy
33. “China’s digital currency and
what this could mean for foreign
companies and financial
institutions in China.” JD Supra.
2021. https://www.jdsupra
.com/legalnews/china-s-digita
l-currency-and-what-this
-7987963/
34. C. Ye and K. C. Desouza. “The
current landscape of central bank

digital currencies.” Brookings.
2019. https://www.brookings
.edu/blog/techtank/2019/12/13/
the-current-landscape-of-central
-bank-digital-currencies/

NIR KSHETRI is the “Computing’s
Economics” column editor of
Computer and a professor at the
Bryan School of Business and
Economics, the University of North
Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro,
North Carolina, 27412, USA. Contact
him at nbkshetr@uncg.edu.

CG& A
www.computer.org/cga

IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications bridges the theory
and practice of computer graphics. Subscribe to CG&A and
• stay current on the latest tools and applications and gain
invaluable practical and research knowledge,
• discover cutting-edge applications and learn more about
the latest techniques, and
• beneﬁt from CG&A’s active and connected editorial board.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MC.2021.3078281

58

COMPUTER 

W W W.CO M P U T E R .O R G /CO M P U T E R

