International Journal of Science and Applied Science: Conference Series
P-ISSN: 2549-4635
Int. J. Sci. Appl. Sci.: Conf. Ser., Vol. 5 No. 1 (2021)
E-ISSN: 2549-4627
ICSSEH 2021
doi: 10.20961/ijsascs.v5i1.62077

Indonesia’s Digital Financial and Economic
Transformation Through Digitalize Redenomination
Silvia Puspa Kumaeroh1, Muhammad Ayesha Arif Sandy2, Muhammad
Ikhwanurrohiim Septenta3, Fina Dwi Utami4, and Mutiara Tresna Parasetya5
1,5

Department of Accounting, Universitas Diponegoro, Semarang

2

Department of Statistics, Universitas Diponegoro, Semarang
3

4

Departement of Law, Universitas Diponegoro, Semarang

Departement of Economics, Universitas Diponegoro, Semarang

Email: silviapuspa26@gmail.com1, sandy.ayesha019@gmail.com2, septenta@gmail.com3,
finadwi2002@gmail.com4, mutiara@lecturer.undip.ac.id5
Abstract: The financial sector plays an important role in the economy and continues
to develop. Some central banks are actively exploring the initiation of digital
currency that will become a legal tender [6]. This digital currency is known as the
Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC). Apart from the technological aspect, the
CBDC must also be supported by the efficient value of the rupiah denomination.
Therefore, it is necessary to simplify the number of digits in the rupiah denomination
with a redenomination policy. The implementation of the two policies separately will
take a long time in the formulation process. This research comes up with a new
concept called "Digitalize Redenomination". This concept that has never existed in
previous studies integrates both redenomination policy and CBDC at the same time.
The research methods are both qualitative and quantitative. The qualitative method
is done by analyzing literature study data and interviews with Bank Indonesia and
economists. While the quantitative method is done by analyzing questionnaire data
of the public. From this research, it is concluded that the current condition of the
financial system in Indonesia has entered the era of digital transformation and at the
same time, Indonesia also needs to simplify the rupiah denomination. The Digitalize
Redenomination mechanism has the potential to be applied in Indonesia. However,
the application of this concept cannot be implemented until the national economic
condition is stable. After the economy is stable, the government can review this
concept to be implemented in Indonesia.

1. Introduction
The financial sector plays an important role in the economy and will continue to
develop according to the needs of the public. This is in line with today's conditions, which
are undergoing rapid changes with the Industrial Revolution 4.0, marked by digital
technology that is developing rapidly in all parts of the world, including in Indonesia.
These changes affect various aspects of life and will cause disruption. As an archipelagic
country that stretches from Sabang to Merauke and has a high population of productive
age, Indonesia creates various effects and impacts of disturbance. In the western part of
Indonesia, this influence is more significant and optimistic than in Indonesia's central and

75

International Journal of Science and Applied Science: Conference Series
http://jurnal.uns.ac.id/ijsascs
Int. J. Sci. Appl. Sci.: Conf. Ser., Vol. 5 No. 1 (2021)
doi: 10.20961/ijsascs.v5i1.62077

eastern regions. However, Indonesia still has to open itself to enter the digital era because
it will affect the nation's future, including the transformation in the financial sector.
Carney (2016) states that innovation in the financial sector will change the central
bank's foundation and bring a revolution to every user of financial services. This
innovation in the financial sector has come to be known as Financial Technology
(FinTech). FinTech has proliferated in developed countries and is also proliferated in
developing countries, such as Indonesia. The existence of FinTech can bring more
practical and secure financial transaction process. This financial transaction process
includes the payment, borrowing money, transfers, or buying and selling shares.
The IMF (2017) reports that total global investment in FinTech companies increased
from US$9 billion in 2010 to US$25 billion in 2016. The type of FinTech that is believed
to be changing the future of the global financial industry is blockchain. The World
Economic Forum recently explained that blockchain was one of the ten most innovative
technologies in 2016. Blockchain is the basis for the development of the concept of digital
currency. This new generation of electronic money, also called digital or virtual currency,
raises important questions for central banks, financial systems and economies. Bordo and
Levin (2017) explain that several central banks are actively exploring the initiation of
digital currency by the central bank, which will become a legal tender and can be used by
anyone. The digital currency is currently known as the Central Bank Digital Currency
(CBDC).
The development of the digital economy through CBDC policy has potential to
increase productivity and economic growth in the future. However, the achievement of
national economic development, which is quite good at this time, has not been supported
by the efficient value of rupiah denominations. Currently, the rupiah has too many digits.
This condition has the potential to cause inefficiency in future economic transactions.
Money with too many digits will drive complex calculations in economic transactions so
that it has potential to cause errors and take longer. Implementing each policies,
redenomination and CBDC, takes quite a long time. So in this research we want to
integrate the two policies simultaneously because it will be more efficient and not require
much higher costs if the implementation of these policies is carried out at different times.
Of course, the integration of these policies is implemented when all the things needed
have adequately been fulfilled. It is hoped that later financial transformation in Indonesia
can be realized through the concept of "Digitalize Redenomination", which is an
integration of the Central Bank Digital Currency policy with the Redenomination policy.
Problems Formulation: (1) How is the current development of digital economic and
financial transformation in Indonesia? (2) How is the "Digitalize Redenomination"
mechanism can be implemented for Indonesia? (3) What are the impacts of the
transformation of the national economy and finances through the concept of “Digitalize
Redenomination”?
Research Objectives (1) To find out the current development of digital economic and
financial transformation in Indonesia. (2) To know the mechanism of "Digitalize
Redenomination" in Indonesia. (3) To find out the impact of the transformation of the
national economy and finance through the concept of "Digitalize Redenomination".
76

International Conference on Social Science, Education, and Humanities 2021

International Journal of Science and Applied Science: Conference Series
http://jurnal.uns.ac.id/ijsascs
Int. J. Sci. Appl. Sci.: Conf. Ser., Vol. 5 No. 1 (2021)
doi: 10.20961/ijsascs.v5i1.62077

2. Method
This study used a qualitative and quantitative approach. The qualitative approach was
carried out using two methods, namely interviews and literature review. In comparison,
the quantitative approach is obtained through a survey by distributing questionnaires to
respondents. A qualitative approach was used to obtain primary data by interviewing the
informants. The interviewees were the Central Bank Indonesia (BI) Payment System
Policy Department and economic experts. BI was used as a resource to obtain up-to-date
information on CBDC policy issues and the Rupiah Redenomination policy in Indonesia
and get feedback regarding the idea of integrating CBDC into Rupiah Redenomination
(Digitalize Redenomination). Economic experts are chosen as the interviewee to get
feedback and suggestions related to the mechanism of research results. This study
produces secondary data taken from several national and international journal libraries
with the keywords: financial transformation, CBDC, and redenomination. Journals are
obtained from credible sources such as Sinta, Scopus, Science Direct, and others.
In addition, this study also uses a quantitative approach through a questionnaire survey
in google form that is distributed to the general public to find out how much knowledge
the general public has regarding redenomination, CBDC, and the impact of implementing
the integration those policies. Before being distributed, the questionnaire was reviewed
and then distributed to several respondents for testing. The questionnaire data was then
tested for its validity and reliability. The validity of the questionnaire was tested with the
Pearson Correlation test in SPSS, while the reliability was tested with the Cronbach Alpha
test in SPSS. After all the question items proved valid and reliable, the questionnaires
were distributed to the general public randomly (random sampling). Categorical (ordinal)
data from the distribution of the questionnaires were interpreted and analyzed
descriptively. Then the data is visualized into a graph.
3. Results and Discussions
3.1. The Current Development of Digital Economic Transformation
The existence of technology has entered into various lines of life, including economic
activities in society. New innovations develop massively and are continuously introduced
to the public. One of these innovations is the digitalization of the payment system. It is
undeniable that the average business actor has digitized his business to gain a broader
market share. While the times are growing, consumers also want it to be easier to get the
goods/services they needed. With the internet, it can connect the transacting parties, so
that regional boundaries can be exceeded.
Indonesia is in the fourth position as the country that has the largest digital transaction
in the Asia Pacific, as well as being the largest in the ASEAN region. It indicates that
Indonesia is heading towards digitizing payment instruments.
In addition, it is strengthened by electronic transactions, which from year to year show
a significant increase, especially in 2017-2020. Moreover, the pandemic forces people to
limit physical contact, and the alternative is to make buying and selling transactions
through online stores. The tendency of people to complete transactions using virtual
International Conference on Social Science, Education, and Humanities 2021

77

International Journal of Science and Applied Science: Conference Series
http://jurnal.uns.ac.id/ijsascs
Int. J. Sci. Appl. Sci.: Conf. Ser., Vol. 5 No. 1 (2021)
doi: 10.20961/ijsascs.v5i1.62077

methods indicates that digital transaction activities are predicted to continue to develop
positively following the development of e-commerce in Indonesia.

Graph 2: Aggregate value of e-money transactions in Indonesia from 2011 to 2020 in
billion Indonesian Rupiah [13]

Graph 3: Distribution of e-commerce payment methods in Indonesia in 2020 [14]
Several digital economic trends, such as trading transactions, have a positive impact
on Indonesia. The Ministry of Industry targets implementing the 'Making Indonesia 4.0'
policy, which is expected to increase real economic growth by 1-2% per year. However,
this digital transformation has also led to transactions, such as cryptocurrencies, which
the Indonesian government has not legally recognized as a medium of excange. The
skyrocketing price of crypto assets makes the public pay special attention to these assets.
Last May, it was recorded that the market valuation of cryptocurrency almost reached
USD 1,8 Billion or around 25 Trillion Rupiah (Statista, 2021). This figure has resulted in
many people starting to learn and invest using crypto assets.
Seeing this opportunity, Bordo and Levin (2017) explained that several central banks
are actively exploring digital initiatives that will become legal tenders and can be used by
anyone. Unlike the private digital currency, the value of the central bank digital currency
will be set in nominal terms. Bank Indonesia (BI), as the central bank, realizes that
cryptocurrencies are very vulnerable to crimes such as money laundering, terrorism,
buying and selling drugs, and other illegal activities. Therefore, to reduce the risk of using
cryptocurrency, Bank Indonesia is currently starting to review a Central Bank Digital
Currency (CBDC). CBDC is a means of digital storage of a value (money) and a method
of exchange issued by a central bank.
78

International Conference on Social Science, Education, and Humanities 2021

International Journal of Science and Applied Science: Conference Series
http://jurnal.uns.ac.id/ijsascs
Int. J. Sci. Appl. Sci.: Conf. Ser., Vol. 5 No. 1 (2021)
doi: 10.20961/ijsascs.v5i1.62077

According to data from Mastercard, Indonesia is currently entering the digital
transformation quadrant, Breakout, which means that although it is now relatively low in
development. But in near future, Indonesia will evolve rapidly and have the potential to
become a country with a robust digital economy. In response to this, Indonesia is focusing
on developing the digital economy, starting from startups digital, e-commerce, fintech,
services (on-demand service), to logistics [1]. In addition, Indonesian government has
made various preparations in facing the current digital transformation, such as
infrastructure provision, human resource development, and policies related to the
Industrial Revolution 4.0 [1].
Infrastructure. Since 2014, Indonesian government has provided support for
infrastructure for digital development, which includes increasing the electrification ratio
and building the Palapa Ring project for internet network quality. To accelerate the
growth of electricity infrastructure in Indonesia, the government approved the 2018-2027
Electricity Supply Business Plan (RUPTL) with a target of reaching 56 GW of power
plants spread throughout Indonesia. The network is expected to make internet access more
widespread and the costs incurred are lower.
Human Resources (HR). According to BPS data (2020), Indonesia's population
currently reaches 271 million people. Interestingly, from the total population, Indonesia
is dominated by young people of productive age. It indicates a demographic bonus in
Indonesia that can be appropriately utilised in the face of the Industrial Revolution 4.0
era by improving quality.
The Government’s Roles. The government has issued various policies that encourage
the development of digital transformation in Indonesia. In 2018, the government officially
launched a road map called 'Making Indonesia 4.0, ' which was implemented into
potential digital transformations in five main driving technologies, namely artificial
intelligence, human-machine interfaces, robotics, sensors, and the internet of things.
Financial services authorities also encourage digital transformation by issuing several
regulations, such as POJK 77/POJK.01/2016 concerning information technology-based
lending and borrowing services and PBI No. 19/12/PBI/2017 regarding the
implementation of financial technology. Contributions also come from SOEs and the
private sector in preparing human resources in the digital era with the presence of NGOs
or digital-based HR educational and training institutions, such as Digital Valley and the
Digital Innovation Lounge (DILo) owned by Telkom, Binar Academy, Apple Developer
Academy, and other digital developer academies.
3.2. Application of the “Digitalize Redenomination” Concept in Indonesia
Digitalize Redenomination has the potential to be applied in Indonesia. Bank Indonesia
has been conducting studies on CBDC since 2017. With these studies, BI is trying to
formulate the right technology and systems for CBDCs in Indonesia. So far, the type of
CBDC that is most likely to be used soon is Wholesale CBDC which only can be used to
solve large value transactions [2]. In addition, the Covid-19 pandemic has initiated the
public to reduce the use of cash. In the past year, the use of electronic money has become
more massive, so that people should also be able to get used to using digital money.
International Conference on Social Science, Education, and Humanities 2021

79

International Journal of Science and Applied Science: Conference Series
http://jurnal.uns.ac.id/ijsascs
Int. J. Sci. Appl. Sci.: Conf. Ser., Vol. 5 No. 1 (2021)
doi: 10.20961/ijsascs.v5i1.62077

Figure 1: Model of Digitalize Redenomination
One of the redenomination stage involves dual price tagging where two types of
currency are applied, namely the old rupiah and the new rupiah paper money. Government
implemented this policy to get people used to the new rupiah and gradually withdraw the
old paper money from circulation. Public will pay financial services with old paper
money. Then, the old paper money circulating between financial institutions and the
central bank. Bank Indonesia as central bank will converted it into a new paper money or
CBDC that is tailored to the needs of financial institutions.
Until now, people still need paper money to accommodate transaction activities in the
market, especially in retail transaction activities. In addition to retail transactions, the
public uses old paper money to use financial services, either through commercial banks
or non-bank institutions. Automatically, old rupiah paper money circulates to the central
bank through these two types of entities. When banks and other financial institutions
obtain old rupiah paper money from the public, the money will go to the central bank. It
will be sorted out which paper money is still feasible and which must be withdrawn from
circulation. As the central bank, Bank Indonesia, will only print new currency according
to the quantity of rupiah that withdrawn from circulation.
Then what about electronic money? Will it use the old denomination or follow the
post-redenomination nominal? Not only used paper money, public can also use electronic
money to complete retail transactions. In contrast to paper money which imposes two
prices on purchases, the electronic money will only use one denomination, namely the
new denomination after the redenomination. In other words, electronic money will only
use simple digits.
Based on the potential and risk analysis, Wholesale CBDC is a type of CBDC that has
the potential to be implemented in Indonesia in the near future. Most likely, this type of
wholesale CBDC runs on a blockchain network. This type of CBDC is exclusive, means
that the network is only used in a limited scope for banks or parties determined by Bank
Indonesia. So that it does not involve the public. That is to say that public does not use

80

International Conference on Social Science, Education, and Humanities 2021

International Journal of Science and Applied Science: Conference Series
http://jurnal.uns.ac.id/ijsascs
Int. J. Sci. Appl. Sci.: Conf. Ser., Vol. 5 No. 1 (2021)
doi: 10.20961/ijsascs.v5i1.62077

CBDC to complete daily transactions because it is used only on a wholesale transaction
scale. People continue to use rupiah new paper money as a substitute for the old one.
However, Digitalize Redenomination cannot be implemented in the near future. The
Indonesian government is currently focusing on dealing with the Covid-19 pandemic. The
redenomination policy alone has not become a priority for the National Legislation
Program (Prolegnas). According to Berry A. Harahap, the redenomination policy bill is
being worked on by Bank Indonesia and the Ministry of Finance to be included in the
2022 National Legislation Program.
On the other hand, every coin transaction in the blockchain requires a computational
process with high specifications and large amounts of power. For example, each
transaction of one bitcoin requires 1704.78 kWh of electricity, the equivalent of two
months of electricity usage in the United States [3]. Each Transaction bitcoin also
requires an average transaction fee of 2,129 USD [4]. So that the application of CBDC
with a blockchain or Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) is not yet possible to apply
for retail transactions because more affordable energy has not been found.
A common thread can be drawn that the two discourses, both redenomination and
CBDC discourse, cannot be realized in the near future because there are other aspects that
require more attention and must be prioritized by the Indonesian government. However,
if the various factors previously mentioned have been resolved, it is possible that
Digitalize Redenomination can be reviewed and implemented during that period.
3.3. The Impact of Digitalize Redenomination
Financial transformation through Digitalize Redenomination with the wholesale
CBDC will have a significant impact on the financial system in Indonesia. Wholesale
CBDC has the potential to increase efficiency in settlements for transactions related to
securities, derivatives and cross-border transactions. This type of CBDC can be another
alternative to BI-RTGS. BI-RTGS volume data for 2020-2021 shows that the nominal
and frequency the transactions has increased [5]. However, the BI-RTGS system is
limited to operating hours starting at 06.30 - 19.00 WIB. The application of transaction
fees is single credit differentiated based on the morning, afternoon and evening periods.
While CBDCs wholesale use blockchain or Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT), the
settlement process can be accessed 24/7 or at any time and can be done peer-to-peer to
provide efficiency in operational time [2]. High-Value Payment System (HVPS) payment
transactions, above one hundred million Rupiah and urgent, will increase due to
increasingly sophisticated CBDC features and designs.
Due to technology limitations and the high operational costs of DLT technology, the
public should use the new redenominated paper money for retail transactions. The
redenomination of rupiah provides efficiency in the accounting recording process because
it reduces the risk of recording errors and saves time. In addition, people's economic
activities will be much easier. People no longer need to carry large amounts of money to
carry out retail transactions.

International Conference on Social Science, Education, and Humanities 2021

81

International Journal of Science and Applied Science: Conference Series
http://jurnal.uns.ac.id/ijsascs
Int. J. Sci. Appl. Sci.: Conf. Ser., Vol. 5 No. 1 (2021)
doi: 10.20961/ijsascs.v5i1.62077

Figure 2: System BI-RTGS by category of transacting party-table[5]

Graph 4: Respondents' opinions regarding the correlation between digitalize
redenomination and economic efficiency
Based on the graph of the survey results above, it is interpreted that the majority of the
public are look that Digitalize Redenomination can improve the efficiency of Indonesia's
national economy. The integration of the CBDC into the rupiah redenomination policy
can shorten the implementation time of those policies, so that economic efficiency is
achieved. In addition, the concept of Digitalize Redenomination can provide an
alternative mechanism regarding the implementation of the two policies which the
government is still studying.
4. Conclusions
Based on research, it can be concluded that conditions in the world are currently
undergoing rapid changes with the Industrial Revolution 4.0, marked by digital
technology developing rapidly in the world. All over the world, including Indonesia. The
82

International Conference on Social Science, Education, and Humanities 2021

International Journal of Science and Applied Science: Conference Series
http://jurnal.uns.ac.id/ijsascs
Int. J. Sci. Appl. Sci.: Conf. Ser., Vol. 5 No. 1 (2021)
doi: 10.20961/ijsascs.v5i1.62077

existence of these technological developments has an impact on the financial sector with
the emergence of private currency that the government has not recognized. In response to
this, Bank Indonesia, as its obligation in the monetary sector, responded to these
developments by reviewing digital currency policies legally and receiving direct
accountability from the government through the central bank, known as CBDC. In
addition, in Indonesia itself, there is the issue of implementing the redenomination policy.
However, this policy can be carried out when economic conditions are stable, inflation
can be maintained, and socialization to the public has been carried out massively. In
practice, the implementation of the policy takes a very long time and is gradual. Likewise,
the implementation of CBDC policies also takes a long time and must pay attention to the
technological needs, the condition of the vast territory of Indonesia and has not been able
to spread evenly for internet network problems.
Therefore, it can be concluded that the mechanism of Digitalize Redenomination that
may be applied in Indonesia is to use a system of indirect CBDC in the form of wholesale.
The mechanism is applied at the redenomination transition stage, where there is an old
rupiah and a new rupiah. The new rupiah represents currency and CBDC that have been
redenominated. CBDC wholesale This is used for large transactions between commercial
banks and the central bank. Meanwhile, to convert old rupiah to new rupiah to the public,
Bank Indonesia through commercial bank intermediaries in the distribution. Gradually,
the old rupiah will be withdrawn by the central bank and replaced with new rupiah after
redenomination so that the mechanism Digitalize Redenomination can be achieved and
implemented.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Directorate General of Higher Education Ministry of Education and
Culture for the funding provided for PKM RSH in 2021. We would also like to thank the
resource persons Mr Bastian Muzbar Zams, Deputy Director of the Group for
Development of Large Value Payment System Instruments and Mechanisms of Bank
Indonesia, Ms Nenden Endah Sari, Assistant Director of the Payment System Policy
Department, Mr Berry A. Harahap, Deputy Director of the Group The formulation of
KEKDA at the Central Java Bank Indonesia Representative Office, Mr Dr Nugroho
Sumarjiyanto, BM., M.Sc., and Mr Akhmad Syakir K., SE, M.Sc., PhD, FEB Lecturer at
Diponegoro University. They have agreed to conduct interviews in this research. We also
express our gratitude to the supervisor, Ms Mutiara Tresna Parasetya, SE, M.Sc. Ak., and
the Diponegoro University PKM supervisor who has provided guidance and evaluation
during the PKM-RSH process.
References
[1]

S. Adiningsih, Transformasi Ekonomi Berbasis Digital di Indonesia, Jakarta: PT
Gramedia Pustaka Utama, 2019.

[2]

Bank Indonesia, "Central Bank Digital Currency," p. 28, September 2018.

[3]

Digiconomist, "Bitcoin Energy Consumption Index," 8 Agustus 2021. [Online].

International Conference on Social Science, Education, and Humanities 2021

83

International Journal of Science and Applied Science: Conference Series
http://jurnal.uns.ac.id/ijsascs
Int. J. Sci. Appl. Sci.: Conf. Ser., Vol. 5 No. 1 (2021)
doi: 10.20961/ijsascs.v5i1.62077

Available: https://digiconomist.net/bitcoin-energy-consumption/.
[4]

Ychart, "Bitcoin Average Transaction Fee," 8 Agustus 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://ycharts.com/indicators/bitcoin_average_transaction_fee.

[5]

Bank Indonesia, "Transaksi Sistem BI-RTGS Berdasarkan Kategori Peserta," 09 08
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.bi.go.id/id/statistik/ekonomikeuangan/ssp/RTGS-Kelompok-Pelaku.aspx.

[6]

P. B. I. A. C. M. K. R. N. R. Berry A. Harahap, "Perkembangan Financial
Technology Terkait Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) Terhadap Transmisi
Kebijakan Moneter dan Makroekonomi," Departemen Kebijakan Ekonomi dan
Moneter Bank Indonesia , Jakarta, 2017.

[7]

Bank Indonesia, "Naskah Akademik Rancangan Undang-Undang Tentang
Perubahan Harga Rupiah," Bank Indonesia, Jakarta, 2017.

[8]

Bank For International Settlements, "Central Bank Digital Currency," March 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.bis.org/.

[9]

R. I. A. G. P. N. A. H. F. A. Z. I. A. F. Bastian Muzbar Zams, "Designing Central
Bank Digital Currency For Indonesia : The Delphi-Analytic Network Process,"
Bulletin of Monetary Economics and Banking, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 411-438, 2020.

[10] R. R. Muhammad Edhie Purnawan, "Significant Effect of the Central Bank
Digital," Jurnal Ekonomi Indonesia, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 125-151, 2019.
[11] B.

S. H. T. Ahmet Faruk Aysan, "BLOCKCHAIN FUTURES IN
CRYPTOCURRENCIES, TRADE," Bulletin of Monetary Economics and
Banking, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 525-542, 2020.

[12] Statista Research Department, "Transaction Value of Digital Payments in Asia
Pacific
in
2020,
by
Country,"
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1226197/apac-digital-payments-transactionvalue-by-country/. [Accessed 7 Agustus 2021].
[13] Statista Research Department, "Aggregate Value of E-Money Transactions in
Indonesia
from
2011 to
2020," 2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/958171/indonesia-online-transaction-value/.
[Accessed 8 Agustus 2021].
[14] Statista Research Department, "Distribution of E-Commerce Payment Methods in
Indonesia
in
2020,"
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/895544/e-commerce-payment-methodsindonesia/. [Accessed 8 Agustus 2021].

84

International Conference on Social Science, Education, and Humanities 2021

