Global Policy Volume 12 . Issue 5 . November 2021

663

Cryptocurrencies and CBDC: The Route Ahead
Marion Laboure
Harvard University
Deutsche Bank

Abstract
This paper aims to provide an outline of the dynamic landscape of cryptocurrencies and central bank digital currencies (CBDC)
so as to comment about the role and prospect of both in the future. We highlight the main drivers of the ongoing digital currency wave from a socio-economic as well as historical perspective. From an investment standpoint, we evaluate the merits of
placing a cryptocurrency within a diversiﬁed portfolio and analyse other factors to be taken into account when it comes to
asset allocation considerations. We also explore environmental, social, and governance (ESG) implications of the introduction
of such digital currencies. Finally, we comment on the current status of national CBDC projects and what it would mean for
the digital currency universe when the ofﬁcial CBDC roll-outs begin in a few years.

Financial innovation is a continuous process, but we appear
to be at a particularly important moment in the evolution of
the global ﬁnancial system (Alt et al. 2018). Money has been
central to our lives for centuries but is still something very
abstract. Over the centuries it has evolved from touchable
objects (coins and, later, banknotes) to a gradually more
‘touchless’ system – via credit cards or, increasingly, smart
phones. The coronavirus crisis has speeded up this process
of evolution, at least as regards the willingness of consumers
to use electronic payments – especially in those countries
where previously there was some reluctance. At the same
time cryptocurrencies allow for new ways of payment.
Central banks and governments around the world are
doing research or experimenting with pilot projects on what
forms central bank digital currencies (CBDC) could take.
CBDCs are a form of digital money established by regulatory
authorities (governments, central banks) and with a legal
tender. This is one of the primary differentiating factors from
the so-called cryptocurrencies which are not subject to such
ofﬁcial, centralized control.
While it still sounds abstract to most people, in 2020 the
Sand Dollar project in the Bahamas became the ﬁrst live
CBDC in the world and the digital currency electronic payment (DCEP), the potential digital Chinese currency, has
already been tested in several pilot projects (Laboure, 2021a).
The Chinese DCEP represents the perhaps most interesting
and powerful project at this point in time. With a large Chinese population as potential users, the introduction of a digital currency in China could lead to an acceleration of other
projects, as other central bankers became more worried

[Article updated on 16 November 2021, after ﬁrst online publication: The corresponding author email address and article category
are updated on this version.]
Global Policy (2021) 12:5 doi: 10.1111/1758-5899.13017

about the race for digital currency supremacy. Other digital
currencies are also on their way to be tested via trial phases
(e.g. the digital euro or the Swedish Krona) (BIS, 2021b).
In the meantime, private cryptocurrencies (also interchangeably referred to as virtual currencies) have experienced a new wave of interest after the drastic sell-off in
early 2018. Prices of the most prominent cryptocurrencies
have risen to all-time highs during the last few months and
established payment companies have announced that they
will start to accept cryptocurrencies as payment. Cryptocurrencies are digital assets that use peer- to-peer networking
and encryption – so in most cases the organizational structure is decentralized and broadly accessible, in contrast to
the concepts underpinning central bank digital currencies
known about so far. This architectural characteristic affects
also the identiﬁcation process for users of CBDC and cryptocurrencies. Many cryptocurrencies are constructed as a
token-based system providing full anonymity, on the contrary, central bank digital currencies might be introduced in
an account-based approach tied to a digital identity to safeguard data privacy. The ﬁnal design decisions for CBDCs
have yet to be made.
As opposed to the planned CBDC projects, cryptocurrencies are issued by private companies and can have diverse
business models – not limited to a currency – but similar
underlying technologies (e.g., distributed ledgers, typically
Blockchain) (Swan, 2015). Many of these currencies are digital tokens with no backing or intrinsic value. While the regulatory framework for these digital assets is still pending in
most countries, many governments are also outright skeptical about the usage. Some of the key differences between a
CBDC and cryptocurrency are summarized in Figure 1.
In February 2021, the market capitalization of the most
prominent cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, for the ﬁrst time exceeded
US$1 trillion. While the most popular cryptocurrencies have
© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Policy Insights

Markus H.-P. M€
uller, Gerit Heinz, Sagar Singh and Stefan K€
ohling

Figure 1. Summary of general differences between CBDC and a cryptocurrency

Cryptocurrencies

CBDC

Decentralized

Fully centralized
Issued by a legal entity and bound
by regulatory framework

Transaction ledger kept secret

Legal and regulatory framework yet
to develop

Digital vs
Cryptocurrencies

Account-based transactions
requiring a digital identity

Likely to not be
encrypted

Transaction ledger visible to all

Token-based transactions
providing full anonymity

Encrypted

Source: Ward and Rochemont 2019).

been established for some time, new cryptocurrencies are
also constantly entering the market and gaining prominence.
At the time of writing, the social media company Facebook
(with its over 2.7bn users) seems poised to introduce its own
cryptocurrency and will thus represent a competitor to existing conventional money transfer systems (Marion Laboure,
2020).
In this report we outline recent drivers and speciﬁc cryptocurrency and CBDC projects, so as to comment about the
role of both in the future. We also explore the merits of
such a categorization and the place it holds (if any) in an
investor portfolio. Many market participants have increasingly started to view cryptocurrencies as a new asset class.
The introduction of more ways to invest in digital assets has
even interested institutional investors recently. The increasing amount of crypto-linked investment vehicles, for example, exchange traded funds, derivatives or wallets will likely
attract more money in the future. In addition, also traditional ﬁnancial institutions introduced custodian services for
these crypto-linked assets. The more widespread and easier
the access to crypto assets gets, the higher the likelihood of
a further market penetration of these assets in the future.

1. How did we get here?

(not too dissimilar from today’s cryptocurrencies) and eventually became less and less effective. Nevertheless, many elements of the Hashcash system would work their way into
Bitcoin’s development 10 years later (Nakamoto, 2008).
The concepts of Blockchain and cryptocurrencies moved
center-stage in October 2008. An author going by the pseudonym of Satoshi Nakamoto (real identity still unknown)
posted a link to a white paper titled ‘Bitcoin: A Peer to Peer
Electronic Cash System’ to a cryptography mailing list. This
paper detailed how to use a peer-to-peer network to generate ‘a system for electronic transactions without relying on
trust’. In January 2009, the Bitcoin network came into existence with Satoshi mining the genesis block of Bitcoin
(block number zero), which had a reward of 50 Bitcoins.
Incidentally, embedded in the creation of this block along
with the normal data, was the following text: ‘The Times 03/
Jan/2009 Chancellor on brink of second bailout for banks.’
This was probably intended as proof that the block was
created on or after January 3, 2009, as well as a comment
on the perception at that time (early on in the Global Financial Crisis) that instability could be caused by fractionalreserve banking (i.e., conventional central banking), one of
the factors that certainly contributed to the rising popularity
of Bitcoin in the early days – which was to only surge in the
years to come (Figure 2).

1.1. Early days
The groundwork for the eventual invention of a cryptocurrency was done in the 1980s. People such as David Chaum,
Wei Dei and Nick Szabo investigated the idea of digital cash,
but without garnering much attention globally. One of the
ﬁrst more successful digital currencies was Hashcash, proposed in 1997 by Adam Back. It had its moment in the sun
before it started to face increased processing power needs
© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

1.2. Comparison of Bitcoin with gold
The Aztecs regarded gold as the product of Gods calling it literally ‘God excrement’ (Teocuitlatl in the Nahuatl language).
The practice of using gold coins as money (along with other
precious metals) was ﬁrst documented around the 6th century BC. Gold coins remained important for many centuries
until the mid-1800s, when many countries began shifting
Global Policy (2021) 12:5

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Marion Laboure et al.

664

665

Figure 2. Interest in Bitcoin as gauged by volume of Google searches
Note: Y-axis score is Google Trends calculation of topic’s proportion to all searches on all topics, scored from 0 to 100.

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

Source: Google Trends data, Deutsche Bank AG, June 2021.

away from the use of actual gold currency in favor of a system
known as the ‘gold standard’ (i.e., trying to express the value
of their paper currencies in terms of gold). This then made
way for the post-war Bretton Woods agreement under which
many countries agreed to keep their currencies pegged to the
Gold. The Bretton Woods system however lasted until 1971
when the US$ to gold convertibility was discarded by the US
to manage its deteriorating balance of payments. This gave
rise to the modern ﬁat currencies (i.e., government decreed
money with no intrinsic value as such).
So, what lent gold the status of money and value
throughout history? One could argue that gold’s implicitly
inert nature (stocks mined thousands of years ago still exist
in usable form), its limited but sufﬁcient supply (approximately 190,000 metric tons have been mined to date with
50,000 metric tons still in reserves), its divisibility while
retaining value (unlike diamonds), its purity parameters (impossible to counterfeit) and a degree of evergreen utility
(decorative ornaments and jewelry and now even in electronics and dentistry), have all meant that it has earned the
trust of humanity over millennia.
However, one of the major disadvantages of gold as currency (vs. ﬁat) has been in the mitigation of economic recessions because it hinders the ability of a government to
increase its money supply (as this will depend on gold holdings in a gold-based system). Such monetary expansion has
been a tool many central banks have relied upon to help
boost economic growth.
In some ways, Bitcoin can be seen as the digital counterpart
to gold, as was recently referenced by former US Treasury Secretary, Lawrence Summers. Like gold, Bitcoin is ﬁnite and
must be obtained through mining – although, while gold is
obtained through physical mining, Bitcoins must be ‘mined’
virtually through the deciphering of special computer
Global Policy (2021) 12:5

encryptions. Currently, around 18.5 million Bitcoins have been
mined; this leaves less than 3 million that have yet to be introduced into circulation. In fact, different supply characteristics
(the Bitcoin mining reward rate halves every 4 years) means
that Bitcoin can in some senses be regarded as ‘more ﬁnite’
than gold whose mining speed has been increasing over centuries. It is a decentralized asset meaning no government controls supply – again similar to gold. Given such similarities and
their individual market activity over the past few years, it is
understandable why many believe that Bitcoin could ultimately replace gold as a store of value (Morgan, 2021).
However, in spite of the above similarities, there are a
number of reasons why it might be inappropriate to compare the two. Bitcoin has indeed grown more robust with
the passage of time and given it behaves essentially as a
communication protocol thus beneﬁting from network
effects (the more people use it, the more valuable it
becomes). Nevertheless, the greatest risk remains that of
security and store of value. While the limited supply does
ensure that its decentralized nature and utility lends Bitcoin
some value, who is to say that – even as the underlying
need for decentralized currency remains – a newer more
advanced technology will not simply replace it?
In addition, while gold has long been a well-accepted
reserve asset, will regulators and governments similarly tolerate a parallel currency such as Bitcoin which they cannot
control, risking macroeconomic instability and potentially
facilitating ﬁnancial crimes (money laundering, terrorist
ﬁnancing, etc.)? Many sovereign governments already have
cryptocurrencies on their regulatory agenda as a key priority
and are in the process of coming up with own versions of
digital currencies.
Another argument against Bitcoin is that, despite its
recent peaks in market value, it continues to experience
© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Cryptocurrencies and Central Bank Digital Currencies

signiﬁcant price ﬂuctuations that may challenge its claim to
be a reliable store of value. One reason behind this high
volatility is the low liquidity of cryptocurrencies: limited
amounts are available to buy or sell, as shown in Figure 3.
Of course, nothing is perfect: gold showed a similar level of
volatility for a period when it was freely traded after the
abolition of the Bretton Woods system, as shown in Figure 4. However, until its volatility truly subsides, it is difﬁcult
to say if Bitcoin will indeed go the same way.

can be interpreted as a way of investing in assets that are
widely unregulated and cannot be controlled by central
bankers or politicians. In many cases these cryptocurrencies
are ﬁnite, that is, have a limited number of coins to be
issued in the future, which make them not randomly
expandable (unlike ﬁat currency), so they are perceived to
have some form of intrinsic inﬂation protection. As central
banks around the world have massively expanded their balance sheets in the aftermaths of the global ﬁnancial crisis
(GFC) and the coronavirus crisis, worries (rightly or wrongly)
about a possible surge in consumer price inﬂation have
risen signiﬁcantly – making traditional money less attractive
to some. The storage advantage of cryptocurrencies may
also be a driver of some investors’ interest: storing money in

1.3. What fueled the cryptocurrency and CBDC wave?
The forces behind the development of cryptocurrencies can
be seen from various angles. Investments in cryptocurrencies

Figure 3. Bitcoin daily transaction volumes are still much lower than for gold and many commodities

Bitcoin
Henry Hub
Corn
Gasoline
Gasoil
Soybeans
Iron Ore
Copper
Brent
WTI
Gold

Daily volume (Jun 2021, USD bn)

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Deutsche Bank AG. Note: As of June 2021.

300%

Bitcoin (RHS, rescaled)

80%

250%
70%

Gold (LHS)
200%

60%
50%

150%
40%
100%

30%
20%

50%
10%
0%
2019

2017

2015

2013

2011

2009

2007

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

0%

Realized 60D volatility, annualized (%)

90%

1977

Realized 60D volatility, annualized (%)

Figure 4. Bitcoin is not the only volatile asset class: remember gold in the 1970s
Note: Historical 60 days rolling volatility (annualized) for gold (LHS) and Bitcoin (RHS).

Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Deutsche Bank AG. As of June 2021.

© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Global Policy (2021) 12:5

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Marion Laboure et al.

666

unregulated wallets consisting of digital assets can be interpreted as one way of expressing skepticism about local
authorities.
One other driving factor behind interest in cryptocurrencies is the perceived payment advantage of transactions
which are settled digitally. While in many countries crossborder transactions are expensive and take time, cryptocurrencies could be associated with a faster and efﬁcient way
of transferring money from one account to another, especially when it comes to transnational transactions (Ye et al.
2019), as most of them are based on blockchain technology
which would not require a ﬁnancial intermediary. The Single
Euro Payments Area (SEPA) initiative is one example of an
approach to improve the efﬁciency of cross border euro
payments within Europe. In that sense cryptocurrencies
would greatly beneﬁt from network effects. The more people use it, the more valuable it becomes (Laboure, 2021b).
This is especially true for emerging market and developing
countries where payment systems may not be that efﬁcient
and a signiﬁcant part of the population has no broad access
to traditional ﬁnancial services.
From a portfolio construction point of view, the continued
demand for cryptocurrencies may also be explained from a
valuation of other assets standpoint (Morgan, 2021). After
decades of falling ﬁxed income rates and record high valuations for equity markets from many metrics, there are questions around how long this can all be sustained. As
investors look for proﬁtable future investments, shifting
towards these digital assets could be seen as a way of diversifying return sources. Recent research papers suggest that
an allocation towards cryptocurrencies could offer beneﬁts
in that returns are low correlated to other asset classes. In
that sense an investment in cryptocurrencies could diversify
a portfolio’s risk-return proﬁle. The fact that entry barriers
for unexperienced investors to invest in cryptocurrencies
because of lower regulation compared to traditional ﬁnancial assets are rather low has contributed to the general
surge in interest. In the past ﬁve years, the number of Blockchain wallets has multiplied by nearly six, growing from 11
million in 2016 to 63 million in 2020.
Technological progress has enabled multiple digital payment possibilities through smartphones and computers during the last decade and has acted as another driving force
behind the rise of digital cryptocurrencies (Gomber et al.
2017). In some countries, the big tech companies have
taken advantage of their powerful positions and have created ways of transferring money through their own channels. One of the most prominent examples is the planned
initiative from Facebook which we describe below.
However, the ongoing evolution of private cryptocurrencies still has its limits. One speciﬁc factor behind rapid
recent price gains has been illiquidity. Price jumps have
occurred after announcements by some big companies that
they either want to invest in cryptocurrencies or start cooperating in their development and uses. In that sense, cryptocurrency prices may, at least in the short term, be largely
determined by the actions or statements of a few asset
managers and ultra-high net worth individuals.
Global Policy (2021) 12:5

At the same time, central banks have not stood idly by.
The monopoly of money creation and management has traditionally laid in the hands of central banks (or monetary
authorities) in most countries. Naturally, they are interested
in keeping a control on what constitutes money in order to
effectively manage economy. In that sense accelerated central bank research and experimenting activity around CBDC
can be interpreted as a reaction on the development and
evolution of private cryptocurrencies and the various private
payment providers. Central banks want to establish an alternative state-of-the-art payment solution. Central banks and
governments also want to address the problem of expensive
cross-border transactions (BIS, 2020). With issuance of
CBDCs, money transfers could be improved in terms of efﬁcacy and cost (within and between countries) thereby facilitating access to ﬁnancial services for all citizens.
Furthermore, in a world of declining cash use, the demand
for digital payment solutions has anyway grown steadily. In
addition, the coronavirus pandemic has shown, that even
cash- loyal populations, like Germany’s, have dramatically
shifted their payment behavior from cash to digital variants,
which may help pave the way for a broad acceptance
throughout the population of a truly digital currency.
The development of central bank digital currencies could
also play an important role in a geopolitical context. The
Chinese DCEP initiative for instance has been launched
much ahead of other countries and lends support to the
narrative of China’s rise as an economic powerhouse. Figure 5 shows the historical timeline of the rise and fall of various global reserve currencies throughout history. If history
is to repeat itself, the contenders for a new global currency
may not be limited to just virtual currencies vs. US$ but also
about who has the ﬁrst movers’ advantage in adopting a
fully functional CBDC in an increasingly digital world.

2. Investing in cryptocurrencies
After the price collapse seen in early 2018, 2020 may have
marked a turning point for cryptocurrencies, as shown in
Figure 6. Several reached new all-time highs and kept rising
in price during the ﬁrst months in 2021. As cryptocurrencies’
total market capitalization has increased over the past
months, it has been attracting more interest from an investment, valuation or regulation standpoint. Rapid price movements are not uncommon for new asset classes that are
entering the ﬁnancial system. Since cryptocurrencies have a
comparably short history, it cannot be said with certainty
that they represent a new asset class. The evidence from
correlations, and clear economic utility now is simply too
weak to make such a statement.
We elaborate in the following sections on how we see
cryptocurrencies in the context of investing and what kind
of metrics can be used to value cryptocurrencies. Rising
investor interest also makes regulators keener on building a
regulatory framework for digital assets. In the last section,
we provide an overview about the recent developments
regarding these national regulations. After that, we give an
overview over the planned stable coin initiative by Facebook
© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

667

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Cryptocurrencies and Central Bank Digital Currencies

Figure 5. Approximate dates for global reserve currencies in the last 500 years

Source: Opdyke (2020).
Figure 6. Price evolution of Bitcoin

2021: New high. Tesla
announced USD 1.5bn
investment in BTC in Feb
2021. Paypal announced in
October 2020 to support
BTC, ETH, BCH and LTC

70000
60000

Bitcoin price ($)

50000
40000
30000
20000

2015-19: Over $1
billion was invested in
bitcoin and
blockchain startups

2017: Bitcoin
surged to an all
me high

10000
0
2015

2016

2017

Libra was
formalled
announced on
June 18, 2019
2018: Bitcoin’s
value dropped
by 2/3

2018

2019

Bitcoin's
value is
back to
the level
seen
January
2020

2021

Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Deutsche Bank AG, August 2021.

in an extra box, which is about to be issued in the near
future.
2.1. Cryptocurrencies as an asset class
As cryptocurrency prices have increased during the last
months, some institutional investors have begun to consider
investing in these digital assets. A few recent major inﬂows
into institutional funds may support the argument that more
than retail enthusiasm lies behind recent price movements.
As the previous section has discussed, some investors see
in cryptocurrencies possible similarities to gold. From a
© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

portfolio diversiﬁcation standpoint there is some evidence
that, especially during recent bull markets, the performance
of some cryptocurrencies (Bitcoin as a prominent example
here) has been broadly uncorrelated with risky assets (e.g.
equities) and this has led some investors to believe that
they could provide portfolio diversiﬁcation beneﬁts.
However, such a thesis should be treated with great caution. The realized volatility of, for example, Bitcoin remains
very high (more than ﬁve times that of gold) as shown in
Figure 7. Note also that in tail-risk events, like the start of
the coronavirus pandemic, cryptocurrency prices plummeted
and their correlation to risky assets rose signiﬁcantly.
Global Policy (2021) 12:5

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Marion Laboure et al.

668

669

Realized 7D volality, annualised (%)

Figure 7. Bitcoin is more volatile than all other traditional assets (based on rolling weekly returns)

90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Bitcoin

Gold

Global Equies

USD IG bonds

USD HY bonds

Annualized volality (weekly returns)
Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Deutsche Bank A.G., August 2021.

Some institutional investors’ accumulation of Bitcoin has
become a problem in itself, exacerbating problems associated with matching ﬁxed supply with demand, especially in
times of crisis, making large price ﬂuctuations more probable. And with more capital from institutional investors ﬂowing into cryptocurrencies, high volatility will likely remain a
risk in future.
So, compared to gold which has demonstrated ‘safe
haven’ characteristics during periods of market turbulence,
cryptocurrencies have behaved differently. From a portfolio
construction perspective any allocation towards cryptocurrencies would therefore take more of the risk budget than
gold.
Set against this, with the growing supply of investment
vehicles (from wallets to futures to large scale ETFs and
funds) cryptocurrencies will likely attract more money from
both institutional and retail investors, which could diversify
the market. Even traditional ﬁnancial institutions are now
providing custody services for digital assets. The easier the
access to digital assets gets, the more investors will allocate
some portion of their funds into cryptocurrencies.
2.2. Valuation perspective
Despite all the excitement around new price highs and the
news ﬂow around corporate interest, signiﬁcant challenges
remain for the investors approaching the cryptocurrency
market. For starters, the quality of information is poor. Even
basic data such as accurate trading volume is hard to come
by, valuations measures are largely untested and are rarely
published in peer-reviewed journals.
While several economists have widely regarded the present cryptocurrencies bull-run as a bubble – there are many
on the other side who regard it more as a fragile equilibrium with supply/demand determining fair value – albeit in
a volatile fashion. So is it really a bubble? An economic or
Global Policy (2021) 12:5

asset bubble as per Nasdaq is deﬁned as: ‘Bubble: A market
phenomenon characterized by surges in asset prices to
levels signiﬁcantly above the fundamental value of that
asset’.
Clearly without knowing their fundamental intrinsic value
(if any) there is no way (at least on this deﬁnition) to ascertain if this is in fact a bubble. At the same time there is still
a great debate on whether cryptocurrencies are even worthy of being called a currency or are in fact more similar to
a commodity – or perhaps they classify merely as a network,
and nothing else. Given all the ambiguity, valuation techniques are also still untested and evolving, but below we
introduce the six most widely-used cryptoasset valuation
attempts, based on – Total addressable market, Equation of
change, Network value, Cost of production, Stock-to-ﬂow
and Option pricing (Hougan and Lawant, 2021):
1. Total addressable market: this valuation is based on the
assumption that cryptocurrencies are competing with
another assets like US$ or gold for total addressable
market.
2. Equation of exchange (MV = PQ): the equation is borrowed from traditional models of valuing currencies and
is based on the assumption that a currency’s value is
related to the size of the market (M) it supports and to
its velocity (V) as it moves through that market. (P represents prices and Q an index of real expenditure on
newly-produced goods and services.)
3. Valuing as a network: borrowed from ‘Metcalfe’s law,’ it
values the cryptocurrency as a network with this value
increasing by more than the linear increase in the number of users.
4. Cost of production valuation: this theory holds that
crypto, just like any commodity, is subject to traditional
pricing challenges on the supply side. As a result, the
value can be estimated by examining the marginal cost
© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Cryptocurrencies and Central Bank Digital Currencies

of mining (speciﬁcally, the electricity burned in running
the computations as part of mining).
5. Stock-to-ﬂow model: the stock-to-ﬂow model states that
prices are a reﬂection of their scarcity and that scarcity
can be measured by the stock-to-ﬂow ratio, that is, in this
case, the relationship between the extant value of old
cryptocurrencies and the amount of new cryptocurrencies being produced each year.
6. Option-pricing models: the option pricing model (OPM)
has also been used to determine a probabilistic intrinsic
value for assets as derived using the prices of over-thecounter and exchange traded option contracts. However,
extremely low liquidity of cryptocurrency options and
lack of a central settlement poses considerable challenges.
2.3. Regulation – more governments will contain
cryptocurrencies
Until recently, regulators and authorities have been reluctant
to move too fast into the cryptocurrency space because there
has been a lot of innovation. This allowed the ﬁnancial sector
to innovate. Competition and innovation are usually positively correlated. But governments are unlikely to relinquish
their monetary monopolies. As Bitcoin or other private cryptocurrencies start to seriously compete with regular currencies and ﬁat currencies, government currencies, regulators/
policymakers are expected to crack down at some point.
In the end, regulating cryptocurrencies is not that difﬁcult.
The Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the G7, and the
G20 are all keeping a close eye on cryptocurrencies. The latter part of 2021 and early 2022 could be a turning point for
cryptocurrencies around the world. Regulators have cryptocurrencies on their agenda as a key priority. Several steps
in this direction have already been taken.
For example, following a comprehensive market consultation in early 2020, the EU proposed a single regulation for
all crypto-assets including cryptocurrencies that were not
already governed by existing regulations (e.g. MiFID II). The
new regulation, which is called the Markets in Crypto-Assets
Regulation (MiCAR), is expected to take effect by the end of
this year or early next. The US government has taken
numerous regulatory actions since early 2019, such as the
Framework for Digital Assets. The new Biden administration
is expected to establish a collaborative and uniﬁed strategy
to adjust the existing comprehensive regulatory framework
and establish new regulations as needed to provide legal
certainty.
In China, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) stated in May
that a virtual currency ‘is not a real currency’ and ‘should
not and cannot be used as currency in the market’. But
again, there is nothing new here. Back in 2017, in response
to peaks in Bitcoin’s value, the Chinese government
increased its already strict scrutiny over cryptocurrencies
and closed the country’s Bitcoin exchange where most global trading was taking place. In October 2020, while piloting
the national digital currency, the PBoC outlawed the issuance of private digital currencies for the time being while
© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

continuing to review developments and necessary regulatory responses.
2.3.1. The libra/Diem case study
From an architectural standpoint of CBDCs it is still unclear
if central banks would prefer a decentralized over a centralized governance system (BIS, 2021a). Despite all the advantages a decentralized Blockchain-based CBDC would offer,
there are serious governance concerns if the responsibility
for maintenance and supervision were not centrally determined. On the other hand, Libra (later renamed Diem) cryptocurrency was an example of a centralized, cryptocurrency
launched by Facebook along-with the Libra association.
In June 2019, Facebook announced a plan to launch its
Libra cryptocurrency in early 2020, which has since been
postponed to this year. With over 2.7 billion users, or onethird of the world’s population, Facebook’s planned cryptocurrency has the potential to compete with traditional
online payment platforms and advance digital currencies
into the mainstream. Facebook’s announcement about libra
made central banks nervous.
The two biggest initial problems with Libra were: (1) to
create a competing global currency by pegging Libra to a
basket of currencies; and (2) the resulting risk that governments would lose control of their money supplies and regulatory authority.
When the Libra project was unveiled in June 2019, Facebook described it as a futuristic global currency that could
serve as the foundation for a new kind of ﬁnancial system.
But in January 2020, the project scaled back. Libra dropped
the idea of a mixed currency basket in favor of using
‘stablecoins’ pegged to individual currencies.
Facebook has adapted its project to jump regulatory hurdles. The revised version of Libra is less audacious and less
controversial than the original project presented in June
2019. This major shift allowed Facebook to address the main
objections of regulators and central bankers. As a result, the
product now focuses on reducing the cost of payments,
rather than competing with governments and central banks
by creating a parallel means of payments. In other words,
Facebook is not planning to create a competitor currency to
the dollar; instead, they hope to compete with traditional
ways of paying in dollar.

3. CBDC – where are we right now?
While cryptocurrencies have seen a surge in interest, central
banks have increasingly been working on developing the
issuance of their own digital currencies. The timeline of the
various national CBDC projects is show in Figure 8. The motivations to issue a general-purpose central bank digital currency (CBDC) are numerous: ﬁnancial stability, monetary
policy implementation, ﬁnancial inclusion, payments efﬁciency (domestic and cross-border), and payment security.
Among advanced economies, the primary motivation for
developing a CBDC is to improve payment security. Emerging
economies generally may have wider array of motivations,
especially when a CBDC is designed to complement or
Global Policy (2021) 12:5

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Marion Laboure et al.

670

Figure 8. Timeline of CBDC research and experiments in various countries

Source: Deutsche Bank AG, various websites, Goldman Sachs. Data as of April 2021.

substitute cash. From an architectural standpoint of CBDCs it
is still unclear if central banks would prefer a decentralized
over a centralized governance system (BIS, 2021a). Furthermore, Central banks are faced with myriad of design choices
– Retail vs Wholesale CBDC? Token vs Account-based CBDC?
Many central banks are currently measuring suitability
according to their own unique economic situation. While
Wholesale would not be too different from current system
(restricting CBDC access to ﬁnancial institutions), a more farreaching innovation is indeed thought to be that of Retail
CBDC. If implemented, it can drastically modify the conventional two-tier monetary system in that they make CBDC
directly available to general public. Additionally, it is likely
that central banks resort to an Account-based approach (over
Token-based) tied to a digital identity. This approach would
be more in-tune with the objectives of monitoring illicit activities while still having a provision to allay individual privacy
concerns. Whatever be the choice of design, we believe central banks should not attempt to overtake the ﬁnancial intermediation function from the private sector intermediaries in
either case. Direct CBDCs would imply a large shift of operational tasks (and costs) associated with user-facing activities.
Most of the operational tasks should continue to be delegated to private players like commercial banks and non-bank
payment service provider – which will ensure a smooth transition from current system.
While most of the CBDC projects are still in their research
phase, some governments have already made further progress, for example,, the Bahamas launched its Sand Dollar
(the ﬁrst digital currency in the world) in 2020. According to a
recently published survey from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) more than 60 per cent of central banks are

Global Policy (2021) 12:5

engaged in practical experimental work. The BIS predicts that
central banks representing a ﬁfth of the world’s population
will issue general-purpose CBDCs in the next three years.
After the Bahamas, China’s plans to issue a truly digital
currency are also advanced. Since 2014, the PBoC of China
has been working on a digital Yuan with a dedicated effort
to establish and strengthen it. It is clear that China’s targeted regulatory actions are designed to support the launch
its digital currency (CBDC). China also recently announced
that they will continue to experiment with its CBDC in more
cities this year. The PBoC has not yet revealed a speciﬁc
timeline for its ofﬁcial Digital Currency/Electronic Payment
(DC/EP) rollout, but the government aims to have its CBDC
ready for widespread use in time for the Beijing Winter
Olympic Games in February 2022. In the Eurozone, the ECB
will decide by about mid-2021 whether to launch a digital
euro (ECB, 2020a, 2020b). ECB president Lagarde has stated
it will take time (approximate ﬁve years) but the probability
of an introduction of a digital euro in the future is high. In
the U.S., the Federal Reserve Chairman, Jerome Powell, stated the need for further work and ‘extensive’ public consultation with stakeholders before deciding to issue a CBDC.
Fed Chair Powell has said that the central bank is not concerned with not being ﬁrst in the CBDC race while adding
that the U.S. dollar’s status as the world reserve currency
already gave it a ‘ﬁrst-mover advantage’.

4. ESG perspectives
Another dimension which needs to be considered is the
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) implications of
cryptocurrencies and CBDC. The energy consumption
© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

671

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Cryptocurrencies and Central Bank Digital Currencies

associated with cryptocurrencies has been particularly ESG
contentious (Krause and Tolaymat, 2018), but social and
governance aspects need to be considered too, either by
investors or by ofﬁcial authorities considering issuing a central bank digital currency. We discuss some relevant ESG
points below.

now to draw conclusions about them from an environmental perspective. But many central banks (e.g. the ECB) are
increasingly concerned about their environmental impact
too and would therefore likely weigh their decisions cautiously in this regard.
4.2. Social

4.1. Environmental
The environmental implications of private cryptocurrencies
are complex. The underlying design architecture underpinning the most prominent private cryptocurrencies, the
Blockchain, is computation-intensive and requires large
€rfer et al. 2020). There is research evienergy input (Gallersdo
dence that the mining process consumes more energy than
mineral mining of copper, aluminium or gold to produce an
equivalent market value. In the case of Bitcoin, the energy
consumption has risen dramatically throughout the years
and is now as large as the annual electricity consumption of
whole countries, as shown in Figure 9. With increases in the
cryptocurrency market valuation the energy use increases
proportionally – a problem that has only accelerated with
the most recent price jumps.
On the other hand it is important to understand that
energy consumption, per se, is not an issue in the context
of climate change. Clean energy production such as wind
and solar produce energy without emitting greenhouse
gases and are therefore carbon-neutral. In addition, many
new crypto projects have been incorporating these concerns
by implementing a different concept in building their speciﬁc Blockchain (moving from the so called proof-of-work to a
proof-of-stake approach). The proof-of-stake concept makes
transactions much faster, thereby consuming less energy
and making the use of cryptocurrencies more scalable.
For most CBDC projects the eventual underlying technology is still under review, hence it may be premature right

The social aspects of cryptocurrencies are also ambiguous.
The implications of high price volatility and the accompanying potential for major investor losses should not be underestimated. As the transactions proceed in gray areas that
are not properly regulated, the risk of price manipulation is
also high (Grifﬁn and Shams, 2020). Another issue for cryptocurrency users arises from the identiﬁcation of their digital
asset accounts (the so called ‘wallets’). The advantage of
removing a settlement institution in terms of reducing transaction costs can easily turn into a disadvantage if accounts
are hacked or passwords are forgotten, with possible consequences for the individual’s wealth. There are lots of existing
examples from the past where a signiﬁcant number of
crypto assets have been stolen or ‘lost’.
For CBDC, the social perspectives – especially in emerging
economies – are associated with the potential beneﬁt of
ﬁnancial inclusion of unbanked people who have no or only
limited access to ﬁnancial services (Fatas, 2019). The global
spread of smartphones and the associated access to online
services would make it easier to set up a digital currency
account, which could be provided either by a central bank
or by private organizations. This argument is particularly
true in emerging and developing countries, where the ﬁnancial infrastructure is not as advanced as in developed countries and setting up a bank account could require a regular
stream of income (Hasan et al. 2020). But it is possible to
make this argument the other way around too: the widespread use of digital money would put that part of a society

Figure 9. Country ranking, annual electricity consumption

Twh per year

Bitcoin

China
US
India
Russia
Japan
Brazil
Canada
South Korea
Germany
France
Saudi Arabia
United Kingdom
Italy
Mexico
Indonesia
Iran
Turkey
Spain
Australia
Taiwan
Vietnam
South Africa
Thailand
Poland
Egypt
Malaysia
Sweden
Ukraine
Argentina
Norway
Pakistan
Bitcoin
UAE
Netherlands
Philippines
Kazakhstan
Finland
Belgium
Chile
Bangladesh
Colombia
Austria
Venezuela
Czechia
Algeria
Kuwait
Israel
Switzerland
Romania
Greece
Uzbekistan
Portugal
Singapore
Peru
HongKong
Iraq
Qatar
Hungary
New Zealand

7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0

Source: University of Cambridge (2021).
© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Global Policy (2021) 12:5

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Marion Laboure et al.

672

without any electronic device and cash-dependent at an
even greater disadvantage if digital money were to replace
cash, either explicitly or implicitly.
4.3. Governance
There are several governance concerns associated with the
use of private cryptocurrencies. As cryptocurrencies were in
the past used for criminal activity including tax evasion,
their further rise and spread could also indicate that illegal
activity in the dark web will increase. Possibly, with further
increases in the relative importance of cryptocurrencies in
some areas a shadow banking system could evolve where
the government loses control over the monopoly of money
and regulation. This would be a development that central
banks would want to avoid, as this situation would imply
that their policy decisions would have less inﬂuence on the
economy.
From a governance perspective the introduction of CBDCs
(as opposed to cryptocurrencies) in combination with the
use of the Blockchain technology would bring several beneﬁts: the existing risks of governance deﬁcits could be
reduced by the better transparency and traceability of CBDC
transactions. These characteristics could also help governments or central banks to have greater control over money
transfers to citizens and companies. Money transfers could
be combined with a certain purpose or linked with so-called
‘smart contracts’ (self-executing contracts with the terms of
the agreement between buyer and seller being directly written into lines of code). In other words monetary and ﬁscal
policy could be much more targeted and thereby efﬁcient.
Tax evasion, criminal activity or the ﬁnancing of terrorism
would also be made more difﬁcult.
The Blockchain technology could also be used for
purpose-oriented ﬁnancing for example in the context of
ESG bonds (Tapscott et al. 2016). First trials in Canada
worked as an example how the Blockchain can be set up to
offer unprecedented levels of transparency and trust allowing public records to be searched, veriﬁed and audited. The
introduction of CBDC could mean that public and corporate
bonds can be linked easier to speciﬁc purposes and thereby
enhancing accountability. But as noted above decisions
regarding the underlying technology of many CBDC projects
have not been made yet and therefore, these associated
governance beneﬁts should only be treated as theoretical
for the moment.

5. Conclusion: sustainable innovation or shortterm experiment?
We think it is highly likely that private cryptocurrencies (in
some form) will stay with us for the foreseeable future. Once
we see some stability in terms of price ﬂuctuations, the use
of cryptocurrencies for the exchange of goods and services
goods could increase as long as central banks have not
introduced their own digital currencies. However, a lot of
progress still needs to be made when it comes to allaying
concerns regarding energy efﬁciency, transaction speed,
Global Policy (2021) 12:5

identiﬁcation issues and regulation before private sector
cryptocurrencies can have mainstream acceptance.
While it would be inappropriate to compare cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin to gold, for the reasons discussed above,
they do exhibit some similarities making the popular label
‘digital gold’ not completely wide of the mark. However,
from a robustness and store of value standpoint, while gold
has proven itself over thousands of years, it is far too early
in the day for cryptocurrencies to merit such a comparison.
Cryptocurrencies are also far from a mainstream asset class
as of now. Nevertheless, with major players like PayPal and
Facebook likely to jump onto the cryptocurrency
bandwagon they are increasingly being discussed in an
investment context. Given cryptocurrencies’ correlation characteristics, they are often touted as an important investment
vehicle especially in terms of portfolio diversiﬁcation or as
an inﬂation or tail-risk hedge – although these arguments
need to be treated with caution. For cryptocurrencies to
attain true mainstream acceptance in traditional portfolios,
markets for them would need to become much more liquid
than they are currently.
Even from a valuation perspective, techniques are still
untested and evolving. We summarized the six most
widely-used cryptoasset valuation attempts (Hougan and
Lawant, 2021), however none of them has achieved any
major acceptance as there continues to be a great debate
on what role cryptocurrencies are currently serving in society – currency, commodity, network or a mere speculative
asset?
At the same time, the widespread introduction of CBDC is
expected to follow with a lot of major countries taking the
lead already. But the roadmap to CBDC execution is
expected to be a long drawn-out one. Governments would
need to consider all the socioeconomic, technological and
regulatory aspects of such a move before an issuance can
take place for the fear of generating an unwanted ﬁnancial
disruption and social backlash (Lee et al. 2021). While it is
still uncertain which architecture central banks would eventually adopt for introduction of CBDCs, we believe central
banks should not attempt to overtake the ﬁnancial intermediation function from the private sector intermediaries in
either case. To ensure smooth transition from the current
monetary system, most of the operational tasks should continue to be delegated to private players like commercial
banks and non-bank payment service providers. The adoption rate of a truly digital currency within societies could
ultimately be dependent on the preference between privacy
vs. convenience. Digital currency transactions, albeit convenient, can be traced by CBDC as opposed to cash and
tokens which ensure anonymity. From an architectural
standpoint of CBDCs it is still unclear if central banks would
prefer a decentralized over a centralized governance system
(BIS, 2021a). Despite all the advantages a decentralized
Blockchain-based CBDC would offer, there are serious governance concerns if the responsibility for maintenance and
supervision were not centrally-determined.
From an ESG perspective, energy consumption associated
with cryptocurrencies has been particularly contentious
© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

673

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Cryptocurrencies and Central Bank Digital Currencies

(Krause et al. 2018), even though supporters claim a large
part of the energy used is renewable in nature and should
go down with time as incentive to mine progressively
decreases – as is the protocol built in many coins. Additionally, social and governance aspects equally need to be considered seriously by investors as well as central authorities –
whether it is the risk of frauds or risks to ﬁnancial stability.
Looking further into the future, a widespread introduction
of CBDCs accompanied by higher regulation of cryptocurrencies could create a more challenging environment for
crypto assets as some (but not all) of their advantages compared to traditional ﬁnancial assets would fade in the longer
term. Cryptocurrencies could still survive, but the increasingly differentiation based on individual business models
and utility could emerge as the key parameter for sustainability (Nicoletti et al. 2017). The underlying technology of
many cryptocurrencies and planned CBDC initiatives, the
Blockchain (or DLT in general), certainly carries an interest
that goes far beyond the use of these two as a means of
payment (Tanda, 2019). The aforementioned technologies
are expected to remain a fast-growing area of growth for
companies across a wide range of industries. In that sense,
the dynamics around these developments should be followed closely.

References
Alt, R., Beck, R. and Smits, M. T. (2018) FinTech and the Transformation of
the Financial Industry [online]. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12525-018-0310-9 [Accessed 30 April 2021]
Bank for International Settlements (BIS). (2020) Central Bank Digital
Currencies: Foundational Principles and Core Features [online]. Available
from: https://www.bis.org/publ/othp33.htm [Accessed 30 April 2021].
Bank for International Settlements. (2021a) Permissioned Distributed
Ledgers and the Governance of Money [online]. Available from:
https://www.bis.org/publ/work924.htm [Accessed 30 April 2021]
Bank for International Settlements. (2021b) Ready, Steady, Go? – Results of
the Third BIS Survey of Central Bank Digital Currency [online]. Available
from: https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap114.htm [Accessed 30
April 2021]
European Central (ECB). (2020a) Report on a Digital Euro [online].
Available from: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/Report_on_
a_digital_euro~4d7268b458.en.pdf [Accessed 30 April 2021].
European Central Bank. (2020b) Tiered CBDC and the Financial System
[online]. Available from: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/
ecb.wp2351~c8c18bbd60.en.pdf [Accessed 30 April 2021].
Fatas, A. (2019) The Economics of Fintech and Digital Currencies. London:
CEPR Press.
Gallersd€
orfer, U., Klaaßen, L. and Stoll, C. (2020) ‘Energy Consumption of
Cryptocurrencies Beyond Bitcoin’, Joule, 4 (9), pp. 1843–1846.
Gomber, P., Kauffman, R. J., Parker, C. and Weber, B. W. (2018) ‘On the
Fintech Revolution: Interpreting the Forces of Innovation, Disruption,
and Transformation in Financial Services’, Journal of Management
Information Systems, 35 (1), pp. 220–265.

© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Grifﬁn, J. M. and Shams, A. (2020) ‘Is Bitcoin Really Untethered?’, The
Journal of Finance [online], 75 (4), pp. 1913–1964. https://doi.org/10.
1111/joﬁ.12903
Hasan, M. M., Yajuan, L. and Khan, S. (2020) ‘Promoting China’s Inclusive
Finance through Digital Financial Services’, Global Business Review
[online]. Available from: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/https://
doi.org/10.1177/0972150919895348 [Accessed 30 April 2021].
Hougan, M. and Lawant, D. (2021) Cryptoassets: The Guide to Bitcoin,
Blockchain, and Cryptocurrency for Investment Professionals [online].
Available from: https://www.goldhorn-crypto.com/ﬁles/cfa-instituteresearch-foundation-crypto.pdf [Accessed 30 April 2021]
Krause, M. J. and Tolaymat, T. (2018) ‘Quantiﬁcation of Energy and
Carbon Costs for Mining Cryptocurrencies’. Nature Sustainability
[online], 1 (11), pp. 711–718. Available from https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41893-018-0152-7?fbclid=IwAR0j- [Accessed 30 April 2021].
Laboure, M. (2021a) Corporate Bank Research: The Future of Payments:
Series 2 – Part II. When Digital Currencies become Mainstream [online].
Available from: https://research.db.com/Research/Article?rid=821850
81-9b23-4f5a-8fd7-a454a9ee7b75-604&kid=RP0001&documentType=R
&wt_cc1=IND-3015026-0000 [Accessed 30 April 2021].
Laboure, M. (2021b) Corporate Bank Research: The Future of Payments:
Series 2 – Part III. Bitcoins: Can the Tinkerbell Effect become a SelfFulﬁlling Prophecy? [online]. Available from: https://www.dbresearch.
com/PROD/RPS_EN-PROD/PROD0000000000517378.pdf?undeﬁned&re
alload=N~pLpr~b00SlEmdchO63obomi1YSoVkVcxXnAM6~8x8Xw4O7
ugXDd~omMG6R8nLzY~8VPsBmQX2klEOJG55cKg== [Accessed 30 April
2021].
Lee, D. K. C., Yan, L. and Wang, Y. (2021) ‘A Global Perspective on Central
Bank Digital Currency’, China Economic Journal [online], 14 (1), pp. 52–
66. Available from: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/https://doi.
org/10.1080/17538963.2020.1870279 [Accessed 30 April 2021].
Marion Laboure. (2020) Future Payments: Facebook Libra 2020: Growing up
into Reality [online]. Available from: https://research.db.com/Research/
Article?rid=8f139fe5_5d47_4c2c_8986_420538827927_604&kid=RP00
01&wt_cc1=IND-3015026-0000 [Accessed 30 April 2021]
Morgan, J. P. (2021) Has Bitcoin Equalised with Gold Already? [online].
Available from: https://markets.jpmorgan.com/research/email/4a6sk
4ss/aJqG_K8v8-iIqXQ8eu9rUw/GPS-3601705-0 [Accessed 30 April 2021].
Nakamoto, S. (2008) Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System
[online]. Available from: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf [Accessed 30
April 2021].
Nicoletti, B., Nicoletti, W. and Weis. (2017) Future of FinTech. London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Swan, M. (2015) Blockchain: Blueprint for a New Economy. Sebastapol:
O’Reilly Media.
Tanda, A. and Schena, C. M. (2019) FinTech, BigTech and Banks:
Digitalisation and Its Impact on Banking Business Models. London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Tapscott, D., Tapscott, A. and Revolution, B. (2016) How the Technology
behind Bitcoin is Changing Money, Business, and the World. London:
Penguin Books.
University of Cambridge. (2021) Bitcoin mining map [online]. Available
from https://cbeci.org/mining_map [Accessed 30 April 2021]
Ward, O. and Rochemont, S. (2019) Understanding Central Bank Digital
Currencies (CBDC). Institute and Faculty of Actuaries.
Ye, S., Zhu, Y. and Lu, E. (2019) The Innovation of Retail bank in the CrossBorder Payment Fund Transfer System: Take OCBC as an Example.
Available from: https://www.scirp.org/journal/paperabs.aspx?paperid=
92789 [Accessed 27 August 2021].

Global Policy (2021) 12:5

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Marion Laboure et al.

674

Appendix
Figure 10. Selected ongoing retail CBDC projects
Notes: Under Review = unspeciﬁed or multiple options under consideration.
Country

Project

Architecture

Infrastructure

Access

Internaonal

EUROPE

Project

Architecture

Infrastructure

Direct

Under Review

Access
Tiering of Accountand Token-based
Tiering of Accountand Token-based

Iceland

na

Status

Notes on movaon and conclusion

Internaonal

Status

Naonal

Research

Notes on movaon and conclusion
Aim to address “steadily diminishing use of banknotes and coin”; “many issues have yet to be clariﬁed, and
they must be dealt with appropriately before a posion can be taken”.
“The potenal beneﬁts of introducing CBDC are not assessed to match the considerable challenges that the
introducon would present”.
Working group; focus on “independent back-up soluon, credit risk- free alternave to bank deposits,
compeon, legal tender”; “more informaon is required before a conclusion can be reached”.
“The introducon of CBDC does not require the use of DLT.”; “opng for CBDC implies trust in the central
bank, which is why we have chosen a reference design with a centralised consensus mechanism.”; “the
technology behind account-based digital payment systems has proven itself to a far greater extent than
value-based digital money”.
“CBDC with the status of legal tender could guarantee that all users have, in principle, access to a cheap
and easy means of payment“; “proof of concept also highlights a number of areas where there is room for
improvement”.
“Within a few years, if the current trend connues, we will ﬁnd ourselves in a situaon where cash is no
longer generally accepted as a means of payment”; “an account-based e-krona could raonalise payments
from agencies and make them less dependent on commercial agents”.
“Households and businesses should be able to make fast, eﬃcient and reliable payments, and beneﬁt from
a resilient, inclusive, innovave, and compeve payment system.”; “two key elements of the plaorm: (1) a
core ledger, provided by the Bank, would record CBDC and process payments, and (2) private sector
‘Payment Interface Providers’ would handle the interacon with end-users of CBDC and provide addional
payments funconality through overlay services”.

Denmark

“E-krone*”

Direct

Under Review

Naonal

Research

Norway

“E-krone*”

Direct/Hybrid/Inter
mediated

Under Review

Under Review

Naonal

Research

The Netherlands

Digital euro

Hybrid or
Intermediated

Convenonal

Account-based

Internaonal

Research

ECB

Digital euro

Hybrid or
Intermediated

DLT & Convenonal

Tiering of Account&Token-based

Internaonal

Research

E-krona

Hybrid or
Intermediated

DLT

Tiering of Accountand Token-based

Naonal

Pilot

United Kingdom

“E-pound*”

Hybrid or
Intermediated

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Research

Finland

Digital euro

Under Review

Convenonal

Under Review

Internaonal

Research

Ukraine

E-hryvnia

Under Review

DLT

Under Review

Naonal

Pilot

France

Digital euro

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Internaonal

Research

Spain

Digital euro

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Internaonal

Research

“The case of non-anonymous CBDC based on technology similar to the current electronic payment methods
would imply signiﬁcant infrastructure costs and operaonal and regulatory requirements”.

Switzerland

E-franc

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Research

“Examine the opportunies and risks of introducing a cryptofranc (e-franc)”; “addional beneﬁts currently
low, outweighed by risks”.

AMERICA

Project

Architecture

Infrastructure

Access

Internaonal

Status

The Bahamas

Sand Dollar

Hybrid

DLT & Convenonal

Tiering of Accountand Token-based

Naonal

LIVE

Brazil

Digital Flat
Currency

Hybrid or
Intermediated

DLT

Token-based

Naonal

Research

Canada

“E-dollar*”

Sweden

Eastern
Caribbean
Ecuador
Uruguay
United States

DCash
Dinero
Electrónico
Billete Digital
"Digitaldollar*"

ASIA

Project

China

DC/EP

Hybrid or
Intermediated
Hybrid or
Intermediated

DLT & Convenonal
DLT

Tiering of Accountand Token-based
Tiering of Accountand Token-based

Naonal
Internaonal

LIVE

Test DLT “as a technological framework for e-hryvnia issuance and circulaon”; no fundamental advantage
in using DLT in a centralised model.
“[...] account based model would oﬀer beer results for a retail CBDC. However, it might also lead to a
greater loss of resources for banks [...]”.

Notes on movaon and conclusion
Improve “ﬁnancial inclusion [...], [reduce] the size of legimate but unrecorded economic acvies,
[strengthen] naonal defences against money laundering and other illicit ends [and][...] deliver government
services through digital channels, thereby improving tax administraon and increasing the eﬃciency of
spending”.
“Improve the eﬃciency of the monetary funcon, ... payment processes and systems, .... ﬁnancial inclusion
and ... user experience”.
Architecture: Hybrid, as on the one side “any relaonship between the Central Bank and society is
intermediated by ﬁnancial instuons, just as with physical cash.” On the other side intermediaries are only
“custodian of the new cash form”.
Conngency plan; “building, as a conngency, the capability to issue a cash-like central bank digital
currency (CBDC) to the public, should the need ever arise.”
Aim to address the “high cost of current payment instruments and banking services”, needs of customers
and ineﬃcient cheque selement.

Under Review

Convenonal

Account-based

Naonal

Pilot

“Means of payment available to absolutely all Ecuadorians”. Operated 2014–16; disconnued.

Hybrid

Convenonal

Token-based

Naonal

Pilot

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Research

“Digital bills that aim to have same funcons and uses as physical bills”; ongoing evaluaon.
“...the opportunies and challenges of, as well as the use cases for, a CBDC, as a complement to cash and
other payments opons”.

Infrastructure

Access

Internaonal

Status

DLT & Convenonal

Account-based

Naonal

Pilot

DLT

Under Review

Naonal

Pilot

Under Review

Under Review

Naonal

Research

Cambodia

Bakong

Architecture
Hybrid or
Intermediated
Under Review

Israel

E-shekel

Under Review

Notes on status, movaon and conclusion
Started in April & ongoing work; aim to create digital alternave to cash and coins for retail use.
Aim to “increase access to quality formal ﬁnancial services”; “decrease demand for... cash”.
"Help in the struggle against unreported transacons”; “contribute to the high-tech sector (ﬁntech)”;
Conclusion that “the team does not recommend that the Bank of Israel issue digital currency (e-shekel) in
the near future”.

Indonesia

“E-rupiah*”

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Naonal

Research

Malaysia

“E-ringgit*”

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Naonal

Research

“Pioneering work reviewed generally concludes that CBDC, even if introduced in the future, would likely be a
complement rather than a substute to cash and bank deposits”. “Technological hurdles need to be
considered, as central bank credibility must take priority”.

“E-won*”

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Pilot

Start researching and reviewing technology, process, legal framework. Test if CBDC will technically work in a
limited environment.

Korea

OTHER

Architecture

Infrastructure

Access

Internaonal

Status

Under Review

Under Review

Token-based

Naonal

Research

CBDC series

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Naonal

Research

Eswani

“E-lilangeni*”

Under Review

Under Review

Under Review

Naonal

Research

Tunisia
Russia

“E-dinar*”
“E-rouble*”

Under Review
Internaonal

Research
Research

Under Review

Research

Internaonal

Pilot

South Africa
New Zealand

Australia
Japan

Project
Electronic
Legal Tender

Under Review
Under Review
Under Review
Hybrid
DLT & Convenonal Account-based
Direct/Hybrid/Inter
“E-AUD*”
Under Review
Under Review
mediated
Hybrid or
“Digital-Yen*”
Under Review
Under Review
Intermediated

Notes on movaon and conclusion
Expression of interest; “The scope of this project is speciﬁc to the use of a CBDC as electronic legal tender
(ELT), similar to the characteriscs of, and complementary to, cash.”
“Safer and cheaper to transport than cash”; “Provides public access to an electronic form of legal tender”;
“Reduces cash demand and supply which could reduce the availability of cash in an electricity outage”;
“Slow payment authorisaon in a blockchain-like crypto- currency”.
“Evaluate whether clear use cases exist for the introducon of a retail and/or wholesale CBDC speciﬁcally
within the context of Eswani. Findings from the ﬁrst phase of invesgaon indicate that there are indeed at
least three potenal use cases”. “However, while these results are posive, further research is warranted...”.

“... the case for issuing a CBDC for use by households has not been established”; “... the implicaons of
CBDC for the structure of the ﬁnancial system would need to be carefully considered”.

Source: Bank for International Settlements; Central bank websites; www.unescap.org; www.efd.admin.ch; www.cf40.org.cn; BIS.

Global Policy (2021) 12:5

© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

675

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Cryptocurrencies and Central Bank Digital Currencies

Author Information
Marion Laboure is a senior economist at Deutsche Bank, a lecturer at Harvard University, and a recognized expert in ﬁnancial technology (ﬁntech).
She has extensive private sector, public policy, monetary policy, and academic experience, including at the European Commission; Harvard University; the Luxembourg Central Bank; Deutsche Bank; and Barclays.
Markus H.-P. M€
uller is Global Head of the Chief Investment Ofﬁce, Private Bank, Deutsche Bank AG. He is also a member of Deutsche Bank’s
Group Sustainability Council. Markus has held teaching posts in corporate ﬁnance and economics, being a visiting scholar at the Frankfurt
School of Finance and the University of Bayreuth, among others.
Gerit Heinz is Chief Strategist in the Private Bank, Deutsche Bank AG.
Before he joined Deutsche Bank he was head of investment ofﬁce

© 2021 Durham University and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Germany at UBS. His career started at Commerzbank. Gerit Heinz has a
degree in business administration from the University of G€
ottingen and
also holds a diploma as DVFA-Investmentanalyst/CEFA.
Sagar Singh is an Investment Ofﬁcer in the Private Bank, Deutsche
Bank AG. Previously, he has also worked as an Investment Specialist for
ultra-high-net-worth individuals and family ofﬁces. Sagar holds a Masters in Management degree from ESCP Europe, Paris and B. Tech in
Engineering from Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi.
€ hling is an Investment Strategist at Deutsche Bank. PreviStefan Ko
ously, he worked as a portfolio manager at Hauck & Aufh€auser. Stefan
holds a Master from the Vienna University of Economics and Business
as well as a Bachelor in Economics from the University of Bayreuth. He
is a CFA charterholder.

Global Policy (2021) 12:5

17585899, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.13017 by R M I T University Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Marion Laboure et al.

676

