The Digital Programmable Euro, Libra and CBDC:
Implications for European Banks
Philipp Sandner1, Jonas Gross2, Lena Grale3, Philipp Schulden4
July 2020
Abstract
Existing payment systems get more and more disrupted. As a consequence of the global trend
of digitizing payments and generating new business models from the use of blockchain-based
digital programmable money, several new payment initiatives have been announced recently.
Besides “classical” crypto assets, also stablecoins become increasingly important. The
announcement of the Facebook-initiated Libra stablecoin is mainly perceived as a gamechanger for the financial sector. Today, also central banks discuss the introduction of their
own digital currencies, so-called CBDCs. To date, these payment innovations are not
sufficiently discussed and analyzed from the perspective of different sectors and industries,
as its implications remain unclear since most initiatives have not yet been introduced. At this
point, the literature does not sufficiently discuss the implications of these innovations on the
financial sector. This paper sheds light on the perception of these payment initiatives by
interviewing more than 50 senior experts. In this study, we analyze the impact of digital
programmable Euro initiatives, such as the Libra stablecoin, and CBDCs, on banks. We find
that both Libra and a Euro CBDC might heavily affect European banks. Experts fear that largescale financial disintermediation of the financial sector could take place, and digital bank runs
could be triggered. Besides these risks, our findings suggest that banks also have the
opportunity to develop new business models stemming from these initiatives. Therefore, Libra
and a CBDC Euro should not only be seen as threats but also as opportunities.
Keywords:

Central bank digital currencies, Libra, banks, digital programmable Euro

JEL Codes:

E42, E52, G21

1

Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, Adickesallee 32-34, 60322 Frankfurt am Main,
philipp.sandner@fs-blockchain.de.
2

Corresponding author, Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, University of Bayreuth
jonas.gross@fs-blockchain.de.
3

Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, lena.grale@fs-blockchain.de.

4

Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, philipp.schulden@fs-blockchain.de.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

1.

Introduction

Currently, there are tremendous efforts ongoing to digitize payments. As a reaction to the
advent of crypto assets and the underlying distributed ledger technology (DLT) with the
origination of Bitcoin in 2008, more and more institutions, such as central banks, banks and
private corporations, are currently working on initiatives aiming to establish a new
technological basis for money. Payments via bank transfers, credit cards, and mobile payment
solutions are already fully digital today. Nevertheless, cash is still the predominant means of
payment in most industrialized countries, but the use of cash continues to decline (see Bank
for International Settlements, 2020). Market shares of mobile payment solutions, like Apple
Pay and Google Pay, as well as crypto assets like Bitcoin and Ether, increase steadily. The
increasing market shares are also due to a certain inefficiency of the current system: Cash is
costly to store, to distribute and to send. Further, the integration with other business processes
(e.g., settlement of securities) can be costly and time intensive. Moreover, cross-border
payments processed via banks or specialized financial organizations such as Western Union
often take several days and are subject to significant transaction fees. Even more, due to the
high market potential of digital payments, an increasing number of players from the private
and public sector are developing their own digital payment solutions. In this context, more and
more initiatives of a DLT-based digital Euro, a so-called digital programmable Euro, enter the
market. Such a DLT-based digital programmable Euro is more and more demanded by the
industry and aims to address current inefficiencies, to generate new business models in the
context of the Internet of Things (IoT) and the machine economy (see FinTechRat beim
Bundesministerium der Finanzen, 2020; Klein, Gross & Sandner, 2020). Such digital,
programmable Euro projects include, for example, Euro stablecoins, referring to crypto assets
that are backed by Euros, such as Libra, commercial bank and e-money money tokenized on
a DLT and – potentially – also a Euro central bank digital currency (CBDC).

As the most prominent example of a stablecoin, a Facebook-led consortium announced the
project “Libra” in June 2019. In April 2020, the proposal was updated, and Libra now intends
to be a general payment infrastructure for traditional currencies with its own digital means of
payments (see Libra Association, 2020). The Libra platform will consist of two means of
payments: A multi-currency stablecoin that is backed by a currency basket, and various singlecurrency stablecoins. One single-currency stablecoin will be the Libra Euro that constitutes a
form of a DLT-based digital programmable Euro. Libra aims to increase financial inclusion in
developing and emerging economies and to increase payment efficiency by decreasing

1

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

transaction costs for cross-border payments as Libra provides a stable, convenient, digital and
global means of payment. To date, approximately 1.7 billion people worldwide do not have
access to financial services, but two-thirds of them own smartphones (see World Bank, 2018).
The Libra consortium intends to facilitate mobile payments by integrating Libra into major
social media networks, such as Facebook or WhatsApp, thereby increasing efficiency and
convenience.

Besides the private sector, also public-sector central banks consider issuing their own digital
currencies, CBDCs. According to a study by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), 80%
of worldwide central banks work on such CBDC-related projects – 20% of surveyed central
banks intend to launch a CBDC in the next few years (see Boar, Holden, Wadsworth, 2020).
In April 2020, the first CBDC went live in China on a test basis so that in some cities parts of
government salaries are already paid via the Chinese CBDC. Also, the European Central Bank
(ECB) researches CBDCs and published research papers about a potential Euro CBDC (see
European Central Bank, 2019; Bindseil, 2020).

This paper seeks to analyze the implications of the digital programmable Euro (and CBDCs)
for the end user, the industry and the financial sector. To date, the implications of Libra and a
Euro CBDC remain highly uncertain as both initiatives have not yet been launched and are,
therefore, in a conceptual stage. Therefore, it is not yet possible to empirically analyze the
economic impact of these innovations. However, it can be expected that the introduction of
e.g. Libra and a CBDC would have a significant impact on the European payment sector in
general and on banks' business models in particular. On the one hand, Libra would become a
relatively cheap means of payment for cross-border payments that could challenge banks'
market shares in the market for remittances, but also in domestic payment markets, if Libra
was to become a substitute for bank deposits. A CBDC, on the other hand, is a digital form of
central bank money. Note that we are agnostic regarding the implementation model of a
CBDC, i.e., direct, hybrid or indirect (see Auer & Boehme, 2020). Since central bank money
constitutes a claim on the central bank, a CBDC can be classified as less risky than
commercial bank money. A CBDC introduction could, therefore, lead to a disintermediation of
the banking sector resulting in higher refinancing costs for banks (see Bindseil, 2020) and
trigger digital bank runs that could threaten banks’ liquidity and banks’ business models.
Consequently, these innovations could disrupt and challenge banks’ profitability. Thus, it is
essential to understand the benefits, risks and impacts of such initiatives in order to estimate
the expected impact on banks and to discuss proper regulatory responses. Profound analyses

2

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

have to be conducted before both initiatives will be launched to have still enough time to react.
Such analyses currently constitute a gap in the literature.

The objective of this paper is to analyze benefits, risks and the expected impact of CBDCs
and Libra on banks. For this purpose, we conducted more than 50 interviews with senior
experts from various sectors and industries, e.g., central banks, banks, international
organizations, academia, associations and others, about the benefits, risks, and the expected
impact of the digital programmable Euro, CBDCs and Libra on banks. Our study is the first to
survey different sectors and industries about these two digital money initiatives. The current
debate about Libra and CBDCs lacks sufficient interdisciplinary exchange even if both Libra
and CBDCs are highly relevant for several industries.

Our main findings are as follows: First, a digital programmable Euro is demanded by most of
the surveyed experts in order to address inefficiencies of the current financial system and
increase automation due to a programmable means of payments. This needs to be highlighted
as the majority of the surveyed experts leave no doubt that a DLT-based digital programmable
Euro is needed. Second, Libra and a Euro CBDC will heavily affect banks’ business models,
for example, such that disintermediation of the financial sector and digital bank runs could
result from an introduction of a Euro CBDC and disintermediation from an introduction of Libra.
Thirdly, experts also see various benefits and new business opportunities that retail, industrial
and financial companies can develop and realize in the context of Libra, CBDCs and the digital
programmable Euro. Therefore, experts suggest to not only perceive these initiatives as a
threat but also as an opportunity.

This paper is structured as follows. In the second chapter, we explain the current private and
public sector initiatives in the field of digital money and provide an introduction into stablecoins,
Libra and CBDCs. Further, we briefly discuss why Libra and a Euro CBDC could potentially
have a significant impact on European banks. Afterward, we outline the methodology used for
our analysis. In chapters four and five, we show the results of the expert interviews and discuss
their implications. Chapter six concludes.

3

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

2.

Background: Stablecoins, Libra and CBDC

2.1

Private sector digital money initiatives: Stablecoins and Libra

This chapter discusses current private sector initiatives for digitizing payments, i.e. in the form
of a digital programmable Euro. While the market share of “classical” crypto assets such as
Bitcoin and Ether is increasing steadily, ever more new DLT-based crypto assets are
launched. Currently, there exist more than 5,500 different crypto assets (see CoinMarketCap,
2020). A large fraction of these novel crypto assets can be classified as stablecoins such as
Tether, TrueUSD or DAI. A stablecoin is a crypto asset that bears an underlying mechanism
to stabilize its price, for example, by using fiat currencies or government bonds as collateral.
Therefore, a stablecoin is a value-stable crypto asset. One reason why Bitcoin and other
crypto assets are not yet widely used as means of payment for daily transactions are their
high price volatility – an issue stablecoins try to address.

The most prominent and undoubtedly the stablecoin initiative receiving the highest public
attention is the Libra project. Libra was announced in June 2019 by the Switzerland-based
Libra Association, a consortium of mostly US-based companies; currently 27 companies
including Facebook’s subsidy Novi, Spotify and Uber. Libra aims to create a global payment
infrastructure with its own means of payment, the Libra tokens. The initiative intends to
increase efficiency in cross-border payments and to support financial inclusion. According to
the World Bank, providers for cross-border payments, on average, charge a 7% fee for
international money transfers (see World Bank, 2019). Such high transaction fees combined
with typically slow payment processing reveal severe inefficiencies of the current system. As
Libra is based on a DLT, the Libra Association expects to create a payment infrastructure that
is more efficient than legacy systems and can process transactions at low marginal cost. The
Libra Association seeks to address financial inclusion by providing a secure and user-friendly
digital means of payment that can be used on mobile phones and will be integrated into social
media platforms, such as Facebook, WhatsApp or Instagram. Currently, 1.7 billion people
worldwide are financially excluded as they do not have access to bank accounts. Two-thirds
of them own mobile phones (see World Bank, 2018) to potentially conduct transactions in Libra
and to get financially included.

Libra is designed as a value-stable means of payment. Price stability is to be achieved by
investing the funds obtained from the sale of the Libra tokens in (mainly) short-term

4

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

government bonds and (partly) in bank deposits. Libra will, therefore, be fully backed by highly
liquid, secure assets. According to the current concept, the Libra platform will consist of two
types of stablecoins. Firstly, there will be so-called single-currency stablecoins that are backed
by one currency. Examples are the Libra Euro that is backed by Euro units and the LibraDollar that is backed by US dollar units. Secondly, there will be a so-called multi-currency
stablecoin ("Libra Coin") that is backed by a basket of currencies comparable to the special
drawing rights (SDR) issued by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The described Libra
stablecoin system is visualized in Figure 1.

Figure 1: The Libra stablecoin system
(Source: Adapted from Groß, Herz, Schiller, 2020)

The single-currency stablecoins will be backed by (at least) 20% bank deposits denominated
in the respective fiat currency and (more than) 80% short term government bonds. In case of
the Euro area, the Libra Euro will be backed by Euro bank deposits and Euro area government
bonds. The multi-currency stablecoin, the “Libra Coin”, will consist of the various singlecurrency stablecoins and is, therefore, indirectly backed by a currency basket. The creation of
the multi-currency stablecoin is highly automated so that a smart contract will create the multicurrency stablecoins automatically without human interaction.
According to the Libra Association’s official goals, Libra will mainly be used in emerging and
developing economies, where national currencies tend to be weak so that the stability of Libra
would be particularly beneficial. Here, the multi-currency Libra Coin as a token backed by a

5

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

currency basket consisting of strong currencies such as the Euro and the US dollar is an
attractive means of payment and store of value. In industrialized countries, the single-currency
stablecoins are likely to be of particular interest. One benefit of Libra is that it is based on a
DLT and can thus be used as "programmable money” (see Klein, Gross, Sandner, 2020). For
example, Libra payments could be programmed to automatically execute a subsequent event
Y when a certain event X occurs. In this way, for example, interest payments or other financial
flows could be highly automated – efficiency gains that are of particular interest for the
industrial and financial sector.

2.2

Public sector digital money initiatives: CBDC

Driven by the developments around stablecoins and the announcement of the Libra project,
central banks intensified their efforts to issue their own digital currencies, so-called CBDCs.
Central bankers are concerned that Libra could threaten monetary sovereignty if it (partly)
replaces banknotes (and bank deposits) as general means of payment. A decline in the
demand for banknotes would reduce the importance and power of central banks in the
monetary system. To address these risks and to maintain their role in the monetary system,
central banks consider issuing their own digital currency that is available to the end user, a
retail CBDC.

A retail CBDC would coexist alongside bank money and cash and could be used as a general
means of payment for daily transactions. Unlike bank deposits, it would not be a claim on a
legal tender but would become legal tender itself, like cash. The ultimate goal of a retail CBDC
is thus to digitize physical cash and, therefore, to provide access to central bank money for
the end user in the digital age. A retail CBDC could be based on both DLT or on a centralized
database. For a discussion about the technological basis of a CBDC see Klein, Gross &
Sandner, 2020).

Note that to date, no retail CBDC has been introduced yet. However, 10% of central banks
surveyed by the BIS (see Boar, Holden, Wadsworth, 2020) indicated that they are likely to
introduce a retail CBDC in the short-term (up to three years) and 20% in the medium-term (up
to six years). Further, 15% of central banks consider the introduction of a CBDC possible in
the next three years (an additional 18% in the next six years). CBDC pioneers that are likely
to issue a CBDC in the next few years are e.g., China, the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union,

6

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

the Marshall Islands and Sweden. In China, the DC/EP project is currently tested, and some
parts of salaries of employees in the public sector are already paid on the digital DC/EP wallet.

Moreover, the ECB is also active and it has intensified its CBDC efforts and published various
CBDC publications (see e.g. European Central Bank, 2019; Bindseil, 2020). Christine Lagarde
stressed at her first press conference as ECB President in November 2019 that the ECB will
establish an internal CBDC Task Force. This Task Force is expected to publish a detailed
report about CBDC in the second half of 2020. In addition, the ECB has joined a consortium
of several central banks, including the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the Riksbank and
the BIS to share experiences from their analyses of potential use cases for CBDCs and to
jointly explore the implications of a CBDC introduction. Thus, it seems possible that a CBDC
could become reality in the Euro area within the next decade, but – as our experts also
indicated – most likely after Libra is launched.

2.3

Impact on European banks

The discussions on Libra and CBDCs indicate that stablecoins like Libra, and CBDC might
have strong implications for banks. Both Libra – in the form of the Libra-Euro – and a Euro
CBDC – as a digital representation of Euro banknotes – digitize the Euro and can therefore be
seen as a “digital Euro” – if based on a DLT also as a DLT-based “digital programmable Euro”.
Libra, on the one hand, will be designed as a (relatively) stable, fast and cheap means of
payment for cross-border transactions. Libra could, therefore, challenge banks’ market shares
in the market for cross-border payments. Besides, it cannot be ruled out that Libra will also
drive currency substitution in Europe so that payments are more and more carried out in Libra
and less in Euro bank money. If indeed less bank money would be used, banks’ business
models could be threatened. Accordingly, Jens Weidmann, President of the German
Bundesbank, argues that Libra is mainly a competitor for commercial banks. Therefore, banks
are under pressure to create their own digital payment innovations as a reaction to Libra (see
PYMNTS.com, 2020).

A retail CBDC, on the other hand, would be a digital form of central bank money available for
the general public and – depending on its implemented structure – could constitute a close
substitute to banknotes and bank money. The introduction of a CBDC could lead to significant
changes in the financial sector as the holder of a CBDC would have a claim on the central
bank and would, therefore, not be exposed to creditor risk, as in the case of bank deposits.

7

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

Thus, a retail CBDC is, like cash, a risk-free means of payment, but in a digital form. Bech and
Garratt (2017) and Houben et al. (2018) argue that the availability of such risk-free digital
central bank money could trigger excessive transfers of funds from the banking sector to the
central bank. One consequence of such a disintermediation of the banking sector could be
that banks would experience higher funding costs. As clients would provide less bank
deposits, banks would have to change their funding sources, e.g., relying on a higher
refinancing by the central bank and the capital markets. Such refinancing would increase
bank’s funding costs, as central bank and capital market funding is typically more expensive
than funding via deposits (see Bindseil, 2020). The resulting higher refinancing costs could
put banks under immense stress and could accelerate another banking crisis.

Further, a CBDC introduction could trigger digital bank runs. In such scenarios, clients
withdraw a large share of their bank deposits “per click” and convert it into a CBDC. Mersch
(2018) explains the bank run risk related to CBDC as follows:
“During a systemic banking crisis, holding risk-free central bank-issued DBM [CBDC]
could become vastly more attractive than bank deposits. There could be a sector-wide
run on bank deposits, magnifying the effects of the crisis. Even in the absence of a crisis,
readily convertible DBM could completely crowd out bank deposits – putting the
existence of the two-tier banking system at risk. In this situation, the efficient flow of
credit to the economy would likely be impaired.”

To summarize, in the case of a CBDC, bank runs could become more likely as withdrawals in
digital form can be carried out easier, cheaper and more quickly (see also Bech & Garratt,
2017; Mancini-Griffoli et al., 2018). Therefore, a CBDC introduction could potentially have
negative effects on banks as clients could excessively shift funds from risky commercial bank
money to risk-free central bank money.

8

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

3.

Methodology

This chapter describes the research methods applied to analyze the research question of how
Libra and a Euro CBDC could affect the financial sector. It is our goal to investigate by using
expert interviews how experts from various fields, e.g., from banking, central banking, the
industry, international organizations, associations, academia and other sectors, perceive
these digital money initiatives in order to assess its benefits and risks for the financial sector.
This paper primarily uses qualitative research methods (see Saunders, Lewis, & Thornhill,
2009) that interpret data utilizing an open and flexible design (see Corbin & Strauss, 2015).

The nature of the topic of this paper calls for an exploratory study of the research question
(see Zikmund, 2003). It is the goal of such a design to clarify the issue of the digital
programmable Euro and grasp a better hold on its expected impacts. Like any exploratory
study, this paper does not claim to provide final answers to the research questions addressed.
Instead, subsequent research will be needed to gain a more sophisticated understanding of
the dimensions of the digital programmable Euro, Libra and a CBDC. Nevertheless, this paper
also has a descriptive character since concrete phenomena are described by a self-conducted
investigation that supports the existing literature (see Zikmund, 2003). Generally, exploratory
and descriptive studies complement and strengthen one another, and, therefore, both
methods can be used in parallel (see Strohhecker, 2008).

Data for the descriptive character of this study has been gathered using semi-structured expert
interviews with identical question sets for each interviewee (see Corbin & Strauss, 2015;
Saunders, Lewis, & Thornhill, 2009). Due to the exploratory approach of this paper, gathering
objective knowledge as well as personal assessments of experienced and skilled people in
the field of digital money is a suitable method to analyze the research questions (see Kaiser,
2014). Furthermore, since we are interested in opinions and sentiments of experts, qualitative
interviews are appropriate as they provide a rich and detailed data set (see Saunders, Lewis,
& Thornhill, 2009). A guideline-based questionnaire (see Gläser & Laudel, 2009) and openended questions were utilized as this is most suitable for exploratory studies since they offer
interviewees the possibility to give unique answers. This way, experts are less biased by
specific framing of interview questions resulting in a detailed data set (see Zikmund, 2003).

The first set of questions focussed on the digital programmable Euro in general. The experts
were asked how important they rate benefits of the digital programmable Euro, such as higher

9

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

efficiency in cross-border payments, near real-time settlement with other assets, rights or
goods, and automation. In the second part of the interview, the experts were then asked about
CBDCs. Questions were for example “Which benefits and which risks do you see in a retail
CBDC?”, “Which impacts might the introduction of a retail CBDC have in the Euro area?”,
“How will a retail CBDC impact banking activities (considering e.g., domestic and cross-border
payments)?” and “When do you think that a Euro CBDC for the general public (retail CBDC)
will be issued by the ECB?”. The previous questions were then modified and asked in a similar
fashion in the context of Libra also to ask experts about the benefits, risks and impacts of
Libra.

The sample size of this study is 51 (n=51). Potential interviewees have been selected due to
their expertise in digital money across various sectors in different jurisdictions. To meet the
holistic approach of the study, not only bankers and central bankers but also senior experts
from numerous fields have been interviewed (see Appendix A). The expert panel includes
senior experts from the industrial sector, from associations, bankers, central bankers, lawyers,
academics and other sectors. After the transcription of the expert interviews, the obtained data
were rearranged according to systematic criteria (see Kaiser, 2014). For the evaluation, the
qualitative data analysis software NVivo has been used for supporting the process of deriving
analytical categories from the raw data and for clustering the experts’ statements accordingly
(see Pope, Ziebland & Mays, 2000).

The following analytical categories have been selected:
1. Benefits and use cases of the digital programmable Euro
2. Benefits and risks of CBDC and its impact on banks
3. Benefits and risks of Libra and its impact on banks

10

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

4.

Results of the interviews

This chapter presents the results of the conducted expert interviews. The key findings are
visualized in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Key results of expert interviews
(Source: Frankfurt School Blockchain Center)

4.1

Benefits and use cases of the digital programmable Euro

The following chapter discusses the results of the conducted expert interviews. The survey
first assesses the main benefits of the digital programmable Euro in general, Libra and
CBDCs. The experts were asked to quantify the importance of key benefits of the digital
programmable Euro on a scale from 1 to 5, where 1 indicates not important at all, and 5
indicates very important. As depicted in Figure 3, automation is regarded as the most
important benefit of the digital programmable Euro with a mean of 4.34. Higher efficiency in
cross-border payments and near real-time settlement with other assets, rights or goods are
rated with a mean of 3.90 and 3.91, respectively. Other benefits of a digital programmable
Euro mentioned by the experts were higher interoperability, convenience and financial integrity
by simplifying anti-money laundering procedures.

11

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

Figure 3: What are the key benefits of the digital programmable Euro?
(Source: Frankfurt School Blockchain Center)

37 experts state that a digital programmable Euro is needed for the general public (see Figure
4). 4 experts do not see a particular need for such a digital Euro. They argue that payment
systems are already well-functioning and efficient today. In 4 interviews, experts express that
a digital programmable Euro is not yet needed; its issuance will, however, become more
urgent in the future. Other experts underline that the need highly depends on the
circumstances. Explicitly, expert C1 names the following scenario in which a digital Euro would
be necessary: "If cash would vanish in usage [...] you as a central bank need to offer a basic
means of payment to citizens, and that could then be a digital Euro. Or there is a scenario
where international means of payment [...] like Libra, would take a very strong position [...] that
would be also, maybe from the perspective of European sovereignty, non-desirable, and that
could also justify a digital Euro then." Further, 4 experts state that the need for implementing
a digital Euro depends on the exact design and the underlying circumstances.

12

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

Figure 4: Do we need a digital Euro for the general public?
(Source: Frankfurt School Blockchain Center)

In total, 31 experts, mostly working for banks, associations, or in the industrial sector, are
convinced that these benefits can only be achieved if the digital Euro is based on a DLT
system. As depicted in Figure 5, 10 experts argue that the digital Euro must not necessarily
be implemented on a DLT but that using DLT has significant advantages over other
technological choices. Academics point out that DLT is not sufficiently mature yet and more
research is needed. Specifically, experts A3 and A5 stress that DLT is the superior
technological choice in the absence of a trusted central party. They argue that central banks
are such trusted third parties. Still, academics suggest that transparency and interoperability
can only be achieved through the use of DLT. 9 experts, mainly central bankers, are undecided
whether DLT is the appropriate technology to implement the digital Euro. They do not exclude
the possibility that DLT can be used, however, they are also open to other approaches. None
of the interviewed experts state that DLT would certainly not be a viable option for
implementing the digital Euro.
Furthermore, most experts indicate that the DLT system should be permissioned, meaning
that access would be restricted so that participants would need permission to join and interact
with the network. Experts D5 and O1 state that the central bank would not agree to open up
such a system. Consequently, the system will, therefore, necessarily be permissioned. On the
other hand, experts from the industrial sector point out that the economy can only profit from
the full advantages of a DLT if the system is permissionless. In the case of a permissionless
blockchain, access to the system would not be restricted and anyone could join without
permission.

13

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

Figure 5: Is DLT the appropriate technology to implement a digital programmable
Euro?
(Source: Frankfurt School Blockchain Center)

4.2

Benefits and risks of CBDC and its impact on banks

Most experts express that (private) end users would be the primary users of a CBDC. Some
experts also see corporations as potential users. Therefore, surveyed experts see the primary
use case for a CBDC being a means of payment for the private sector. Moreover, some
experts expect use cases in the context of the machine economy and IoT due to the potential
programmability feature of a CBDC.

Figure 6: Benefits of a CBDC
(Source: Frankfurt School Blockchain Center)

14

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

The surveyed experts see various substantial benefits that a CBDC could bring (see Figure
6). Note that experts were allowed to give multiple answers. 18 experts, mainly from the
industrial sector and academia, expect efficiency gains due to lower transaction costs and
higher transaction speed. Further, 7 experts expect decreasing (business) costs due to a
higher level of automation. Such automation is particularly promising for IoT and the machine
economy and stems from the potential programmability of a CBDC. Furthermore, 12 experts
expect higher payment convenience as a CBDC could provide a convenient means of
payment. 5 experts in academia and the industrial sector stress that a key benefit of CBDC is
that it can act as a safe store of value. They suggest that there is a need for safe digital central
bank money, for example, in times of financial distress. Expert A4 states that a CBDC will
constitute "a risk-free means of payment, and therefore also a risk-free store of value, which
is not the case with bank money [...] even though you have [...] prudential regulation and
guarantee schemes, etc. But history shows, it's not sufficient alone."

12 experts mention financial integrity as another significant benefit of a CBDC and point out
that a CBDC can reduce informality, tax evasion, and illegal activities as the central bank can
monitor transaction flows more efficiently than with physical cash and commercial bank
money. Therefore, also anti-money laundering (AML) and measures to combat the financing
of terrorism (CFT) can be implemented more efficiently. Additionally, experts mention that
privacy of financial transaction data can be reached more efficiently by the public as compared
to the private sector.

8 experts argue that a CBDC can be beneficial for monetary policy. Monetary policy could
become more effective if central banks are in control of the issuance of money creation instead
of commercial banks. Further, with a CBDC central banks can maintain their role in the
monetary system. Academics also argue that an (interest-bearing) CBDC provides a new
instrument to conduct monetary policy with a “potentially faster and stronger, more direct
monetary policy transmission,” as stated by expert A9. According to 9 experts, CBDC will
foster financial inclusion.

Further, 4 experts express that a CBDC could preserve European monetary sovereignty in
case Non-European payment systems get more and more adopted. Specifically, expert F5
states that a CBDC can increase “the competitiveness of a national currency overall, if you as
a specific country will be able to transparently deploy a retail CBDC and show that it's
governed in a way that it's healthy, democratic.” Expert B1 argues that if the ECB does not

15

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

introduce a CBDC, the physical Euro will soon be outcompeted by other payment systems.
Accordingly, he states: "Be it Libra or be it foreign CBDCs – [they] could gain market shares
here and this would cost employment and jobs." He concludes that a CBDC is necessary to
protect European monetary sovereignty.

Maintaining monetary sovereignty by implementing a Euro CBDC is further discussed against
the background of China's launch of its own digital currency, the DC/EP project. Most experts
expect that the DC/EP project will be an accelerator for the introduction of a CBDC in the Euro
area. Moreover, expert D1 stresses geopolitical implications and observes a "battle between
the Chinese and the Americans, who is going to dominate the world of […] digital currencies".
In case the Chinese digital currency – and also the Libra multi-currency stablecoin – is used
on a large scale, it will result in diminishing importance of the Euro as a global currency.
Specifically, expert A1 states that "if not only the Chinese but also the Americans start a project
like this, I think this would be a wake-up call for the ECB."

Figure 7: Risks of a CBDC
(Source: Frankfurt School Blockchain Center)

Besides these benefits, experts also see several risks if a CBDC is indeed introduced by the
ECB (see Figure 7). 24 experts mention potential risks for financial stability. This includes bank
disintermediation and digital bank runs. Accordingly, experts point out that a CBDC is
competing with bank deposits and could drive a disintermediation of funds from the banking
sector to the central bank. Further, due to the increased availability of such digital central bank
money, the likelihood of bank runs could increase. All of the surveyed central bankers, as well

16

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

as academics, see such risks as critical and argue that a CBDC should be implemented in a
way that does not threaten financial stability.

Besides financial stability, 5 experts express concerns from an increased centralization of
credit with a larger balance sheet of central banks as a consequence of a CBDC introduction.
According to experts O3 and A4, end users could further be negatively affected if CBDC
deposits will be remunerated with negative interest rates. Likewise, they warn against
significant effects if negative interest rates are accompanied by a potential abolishment of
cash.

15 experts see operational risks regarding the implementation process of a CBDC.
Accordingly, an implementation is costly and cumbersome and also includes reputational risks
if the issuer does not manage to meet the requirements of the public resulting in a low adoption
rate of a CBDC. 5 experts from the industrial sector specifically draw upon the difficulties
finding an efficient way of designing a CBDC. They underline the issues of cybersecurity, data
privacy and the technological implementation. Accordingly, expert I7 stresses that a CBDC
might “increase the feeling of [...] being controlled, being observed and becoming the
transparent citizen,” so that citizens may be increasingly skeptical.

Experts across all sectors seem to agree that banks will be negatively affected by the
introduction of a CBDC. 22 of the surveyed experts state that they expect a crowding out of
financial institutions offering payment services. Other experts expect that incumbent banks will
lose large parts of their market shares, and their business models will be profoundly affected.
Precisely, experts expect the number of intermediaries in financial markets to shrink.

13 experts, contrarily, state potential positive effects on the financial industry and banks. The
disruptive effects of the implementation of a CBDC could be an enabler for innovation and will
open up new business models for banks. Specifically, expert I7 stresses that intermediaries
“would [...] need to specialize more on their value-added services.” Expert A7 is convinced
that a CBDC will certainly transform the banking system but that banks are able to adapt to
such a change. Others argue that new opportunities will evolve that have the power to reform
existing financial institutions.

Further, 12 experts expect commercial banks to be involved in CBDC distribution processes
(for more details of such a hybrid form of a CBDC see Auer & Boehme, 2020). Specifically,

17

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

expert D2 describes the potential future role of commercial banks as follows: "One could
foresee a future where the legal tender, which is today physical banknotes, is in future a CBDC
and the banking sector, in a similar way as it is doing today, is distributing this legal tender."
Additionally, 3 central bankers point out that it should be made use of the existing
infrastructures of commercial banks and that central banks do not intend to displace incumbent
banks or private payment service providers. 5 experts do not see any impact of the introduction
of CBDC on commercial banks at all.

As the last question on CBDC, we asked the experts, when the ECB will issue a CBDC. The
results are shown in Figure 8. 21 surveyed experts estimate that a Euro CBDC will be issued
by the ECB in 3 to 5 years. Another 21 experts expect that a CBDC will be launched in 6 to
10 years. Further, 2 experts expect a Euro CBDC issuance within the next 2 years. 3 experts
do not think the ECB will issue a CBDC before 2030. Another 3 experts did not provide an
estimate of when or whether at all a CBDC will be introduced in the Euro area.

Figure 8: When will a Euro CBDC be issued by the ECB?
(Source: Frankfurt School Blockchain Center)

4.3

Benefits and risks of Libra and its impact on banks

The majority of the surveyed experts agree that end users will be the primary users of Libra.
Some experts see merchants as further adopters, as they are needed to install wide-scale
Libra payment systems. Merchants are incentivized to use the Libra payment infrastructure as
the Libra platform is likely to be cheaper than credit or debit card schemes. Some other experts
suggest that the industry will later on also adopt Libra since corporates might benefit from the

18

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

programmability feature of Libra. Mainly experts from the industrial sector state that firms will
accelerate their ambitions to make use of IoT and smart contracts in combination with Libra.

Figure 9: Benefits of Libra
(Source: Frankfurt School Blockchain Center)

According to the experts, the Libra project provides various advantages (see Figure 9). Higher
efficiency in payment transactions is the most frequently mentioned advantage, with 18
experts stressing that Libra will enable faster and cheaper transactions, especially for crossborder payments. In this context, 11 experts further point out that Libra will offer more
convenient transactions than with currently existing means of payment. As pointed out by
experts from the non-financial industry, such convenience could be especially beneficial for
use cases in e-commerce. 3 experts underline the high interoperability of Libra as a major
advantage over CBDCs that are most likely limited in their global use.

12 experts see a significant advantage of Libra in the context of financial inclusion. They stress
significant benefits for countries in that the share of unbanked people is particularly high.
Likewise, Libra, as a global stablecoin, could provide easy and convenient access to a
financial system and a stable currency that could be both used as a means of payment and
store of value.

As another benefit of Libra, experts mention increasing competition in the payments market
due to Libra's disruptive force. Expert E1 indicates that its implementation will "shake [...] the
international financial system" and, thus, enable financial innovations. Some experts point out
that with increasing competitiveness, the financial sector and central banks now need to act
19

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

quickly and find responses to Libra. Expert B1 calls it a "Sputnik moment for CBDC suppliers"
and sees Libra as a wake-up call for current players in the financial system. 13 experts support
the view of Libra being a wake-up call for bankers and central bankers.

Figure 10: Risks of Libra
(Source: Frankfurt School Blockchain Center)

Even though Libra is perceived to be beneficial in various dimensions, experts stress that
several potential risk factors could arise (see Figure 10). The most significant risk mentioned
by 13 experts regards the possibility of Libra abusing its market power. Specifically, expert A4
points out the importance of network effects with respect to payment services and states that
the “network effect will be there from the beginning, in an ideal form.” According to the experts,
Libra is likely to become dominant. Therefore, many experts worry that the Libra Association
will abuse its market power. Correspondingly, such fear stems from the fact that Libra will be
centralizing large amounts of data if it reaches a considerable amount of users. Accordingly,
8 experts perceive Libra’s high degree of data centralization as a threat. Expert B5 identifies
potential conflicts in the close relationship between Libra and Facebook, the initiator of the
Libra Association and represented by its subsidy Novi. In addition to data privacy, 9 experts
mention insufficient consumer protection and privacy risks as further risk factors. 12 experts
consider the regulation of Libra to be essential and emphasize that regulatory measures must
be carried out diligently. Accordingly, expert C2 expresses that “it needs to be ensured that
money laundering can be avoided – so that risks regarding money laundering and terror
financing will not arise.” So far, regulation is not yet in place and also difficult to implement for
such a globally operating financial platform.

20

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

Lawyers point to issues related to competition and entity trust law. 9 experts are concerned
about the diminishing power of central banks resulting in less efficient monetary policy
measures. In contrast, 5 experts, mainly from the industrial sector, argue that many perceived
risks regarding Libra are exaggerated. Specifically, expert D1 compares the potential size of
the Libra reserve with the volume of large exchange-traded funds (ETFs), which he considers
ultimately riskier than the Libra project.

According to the experts, a distinction has to be made between developing and industrial
regions when analyzing the potential impact of Libra. Several experts are convinced that the
effects of the introduction of Libra in industrialized countries will be minimal. The prevalent
opinion is that a new payment system such as Libra is not needed in industrialized countries
since there are efficient financial systems in place. Therefore, some experts anticipate that
people will remain with their incumbent retail banks and will not use Libra on a wide scale.
Nevertheless, a few experts argue that due to the high convenience of Libra and the expected
low transaction costs, clients have a reason to change their payment service providers from a
bank to the Libra Association.

Experts presume that the impact of Libra in developing countries will be higher than in
industrialized countries. In developing countries, (volatile and week) domestic currencies are
likely to be substituted with Libra. Accordingly, such substitution has far-reaching
consequences for the monetary system and monetary policy of central banks in developing
countries. Also, since banking services are often not fully developed and, therefore, not as
efficient as in developed countries, experts expect that users are likely to switch to Libra.
Additionally, they mention that Libra will be an attractive means of payment and a stable store
of value. Experts reach a consensus on the fact that Libra will foster financial inclusion and
that it can have positive impacts on economic growth.

Similar to the effects of a Euro CBDC, 25 experts also expect that Libra will drive a
disintermediation of financial intermediaries. On the one hand, many of the surveyed experts
assume that Libra will take away market shares of banks, credit card schemes or payment
service providers. Expert I4 points out that Libra “could completely take over cross border
payments.” On the other hand, 11 experts expect that Libra may transform the financial market
in a positive way, so that Libra will “spur competition, and [...] will create more innovation,” as
expert I13 indicates. Experts in the industrial sector state that Libra will make banks increase

21

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

their efforts in investing in new technologies so that banks will also be more innovative in the
future.

Other experts expect a limited impact of Libra on banking in developed countries due to the
lock-in effect of substantial customers of retail banks. Expert B2 concretely states that "the
bank account is so deeply embedded into the current financial world of the developed
countries that it will stay." Some experts are even more optimistic and stress that banks will
potentially be involved in the Libra ecosystem as Libra will need intermediaries to provide
services to end users and could support managing the Libra Reserve.

According to most experts, Libra is likely to be introduced in the Euro area next year (see
Figure 11). 14 experts date the implementation of Libra in 2022. Further, 4 experts believe
that we will not have Libra in the Euro area before 2023. 3 experts are convinced that Libra
will be launched until the end of this year.

Figure 11: When will Libra be introduced in the Euro area?
(Source: Frankfurt School Blockchain Center)

5.

Discussion: Impact of CBDC and Libra on banks

Our results indicate that banks might be heavily affected by the introduction of a digital
programmable Euro, in the form of Libra, and a Euro CBDC. Recall that in this paper, we are
agnostic regarding a direct, hybrid or indirect CBDC model (see Auer & Boehme, 2020).
Experts presume that both Libra and a Euro CBDC will have a severe impact on banks’
business models and profitability. As described in the previous chapter, one of the main risks
22

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

experts see in a CBDC is a potential disintermediation of the financial sector, when end users
convert a high amount of bank deposits into a CBDC. The experts we asked, therefore, fear
that the introduction of a CBDC will yield a crowding out of bank deposits as CBDC is mainly
perceived as a riskless substitute for bank deposits. Consequently, the refinancing costs of
banks could increase as central bank and capital market funding is typically more expensive
than funding via bank deposits (see Bindseil, 2020).

Furthermore, experts expect that the availability of a digital form of central bank money could
trigger digital bank runs. In the current system, there is also a certain risk that bank runs occur
so that clients massively withdraw physical cash from their bank accounts. One example is
the bank run in Cyprus in 2013. Households feared that their bank deposits were no longer
safe and withdrew more than 40% of their funds within one year. However, the likelihood of
such a bank run is limited by monetary and non-monetary transaction costs, e.g., related to
the storage of cash and the imposed daily limits for cash withdrawals. In the case of a CBDC,
such bank runs could become more likely as withdrawals in digital form can be carried out
easier and most of the mentioned monetary and non-monetary transaction costs would no
longer arise (see Bech & Garratt, 2017). Note that we abstract from an (unrealistic) scenario
where CBDC completely substitutes bank deposits so that bank runs can no longer appear.

Recent publications by the ECB indicate that it is essential for the ECB to preserve financial
stability and to prevent a disintermediation of the financial sector and digital bank runs. If such
threats cannot be ruled out, according to Ulrich Bindseil, Director General for Market
Infrastructures and Payments at the ECB, a CBDC will not be introduced:

"CBDC should be launched only if the central bank can be confident that [...] undesired
structural disintermediation of the banking system, and avoidance in systemic crises of
a facilitation of aggregate bank runs, have been solved." (Bindseil, 2020)

However, note that there are already proposals in the literature how to prevent such a
disintermediation and digital bank runs. Such proposals include introducing maximum
conversion limits of bank money in CBDC (see Panetta, 2018), introducing an exchange rate
between bank deposits and CBDC (see Kumhof & Noone, 2018) or implementing a two-tiered
interest rate structure on CBDC holdings (see Bindseil, 2020).

23

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

Besides CBDC, a significant number of surveyed experts presume that also Libra will affect
banks’ businesses. According to the experts, Libra will constitute an additional competitor for
banks as Libra will provide an alternative payment platform that competes with banks’ payment
infrastructures. Moreover, it is also possible that in the future third parties use the Libra network
to grant loans denominated in Libra. The availability of such Libra loans could also accelerate
a crowding out of bank money. Further, experts expressed that Libra could impact banks’
market shares in the cross-border payment business. Libra aims to increase financial inclusion
and to decrease transaction costs for cross-border payments. If transaction costs will, in the
end, indeed be very low, then clients could switch from classical cross-border payment service
providers such as banks or financial organizations such as Western Union or Moneygram to
the Libra Association. Such a shift would lower the market shares of banks in the field of crossborder payments. Nevertheless, our results suggest that such potential substitution is more
likely to occur in developing and emerging economies as compared to industrialized countries
as Libra will most likely be mainly used in developing and emerging countries. Further, experts
presume that the impact of Libra on banks will be smaller than the impact of CBDC on banks.

Our results also indicate that banks still have the chance to assert themselves and to mitigate
a large-scale crowding out of bank deposits. Despite the expected negative effects on banks,
our findings suggest that banks should not only perceive Libra and a Euro CBDC as a threat
but also as an opportunity to adjust their business models and to generate new profitable
services. In a future scenario with Libra and a Euro CBDC being introduced, banks could
generate new business models and services both in the Libra and the CBDC system. Banks
are very experienced in conducting Know-Your-Customer (KYC) services and in detecting and
preventing money laundering and terror financing. Therefore, a CBDC system could be
designed in such a way that banks will keep an important position. In the current two-tiered
money system, banks obtain banknotes from the central bank and distribute these banknotes
to the end users. Therefore, banks undertake tasks to interact with end users – the central
bank does not directly interact with the end user. Therefore, tasks are divided between the
central bank and commercial banks in the form of a private-public partnership. Such a twotiered system is also imaginable for a CBDC so that banks would continue to distribute central
bank money, not only in the form of banknotes but also in the form of a CBDC, for example in
a hybrid CBDC model (see Auer & Boehme, 2020). Such a two-tiered system is, for example,
suggested for most of the current global CBDC initiatives, e.g., in China and in Sweden (see
Weisbrodt & Gross, 2020). Also, the ECB suggests the use of a two-tiered system in a CBDC
publication (see ECB, 2019). Therefore, a CBDC can also be set up in such a system where
banks remain important.
24

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

Also in the Libra system, banks could become essential players. First, banks could join the
Libra Association and would get financially rewarded by a share of the transaction fees and a
share on the interest income from the Libra Reserve assets as all members of the Libra
Association. Secondly, banks could act as designated dealers or virtual asset service
providers in the Libra ecosystem. Designated dealers, on the one hand, are intermediaries
between the Libra Association – that creates Libra units – and the end user – who then spends
the created units. Besides distributing the Libra tokens, designated dealers also buy
government bonds for the Libra Reserve and provide them to the Libra Association as
collateral. Such tasks could be conducted by banks that would get financially rewarded in
return. Virtual asset service providers, on the other hand, are third-parties that offer services
on top of the Libra network. Therefore, banks could e.g., provide custody services and develop
their own wallet solutions on top of the Libra network. Also, banks could, in theory, grant Libra
denominated loans. Accordingly, our results suggest that also in a Libra and CBDC system,
banks could become essential players. Consequently, these innovations should not only be
seen as threats but also as opportunities to diversify and generate new business models.

Besides an active role in the Libra and the CBDC system, banks could also drive their own
initiatives in the field of payment innovations. DLT provides new opportunities, for example,
for DLT-based pay-per-use business models within the framework of IoT. Here, a
programmable and digital form of the Euro serves as a backbone for applications in the fields
of e.g., Industry 4.0, mobility and energy. The emerging networked economy facilitates new
forms of inter-organizational and inter-industry collaboration. Within this framework, banks
could act as issuers of a DLT-based (digital programmable) Euro and tokenize commercial
bank money for the use in e.g. integrated business ecosystems. Our results show that the
industry demands such a DLT-based Euro e.g., in the field of IoT, the machine economy and
prospective digital business models. Therefore, banks could address this market gap and
generate new business models by providing such a DLT-based Euro.

6.

Conclusion

Our analysis suggests that the introduction of the digital programmable Euro, Libra, and a
Euro CBDC would have strong implications for the industry and the financial sector. Our main
findings are as follows: First, a digital programmable Euro is demanded by most of the
surveyed experts in order to address inefficiencies of the current financial system and increase
automation due to a programmable means of payments. Second, Libra and a Euro CBDC will

25

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

heavily affect banks’ business models, for example, such that disintermediation of the financial
sector and digital bank runs could result from an introduction of a Euro CBDC and
disintermediation from an introduction of Libra. Thirdly, experts also see various benefits and
new business opportunities that retail, industrial and financial companies can develop and
realize in the context of Libra, CBDC and the digital programmable Euro. Therefore, experts
suggest to not only perceive these initiatives as a threat but also as an opportunity.

The surveyed experts expect that Libra will be introduced before a Euro CBDC. More than
80% of the experts estimate that Libra will be launched in the Euro area by 2022 and a Euro
CBDC by 2030. According to our surveyed experts, banks will be heavily affected by the
introduction of Libra and a Euro CBDC and should take precautions so that, in the end, new
business models will emerge. The mentioned benefits of Libra and a Euro CBDC and the high
relevance of the aspect of programmability point to one fact: These two initiatives are not
necessarily an end in themselves but rather a vehicle to achieve a desired objective, i.e., the
digital programmable Euro. Our findings suggest that bank-related opportunities emerge
besides the discussed risks for banks. Such a digital programmable Euro can create
significantly higher efficiency for cross-border payments, enables near real-time settlement
with other assets, rights and goods and, above all, a high degree of automation. Therefore,
such a digital programmable Euro is demanded by the Association of German Banks (see
Bundesverband deutscher Banken, 2020). As a result, this in turn forms the basis for business
models associated with the machine economy in the fields of e.g. Industry 4.0, logistics,
mobility, energy and IoT. The cross-sectoral application of digital money implies that the
introduction of a digital programmable Euro will not only affect banks, but also the industrial,
non-banking, sector. Such a vehicle opens up cross-sectoral business opportunities that could
not be achieved in the absence of a digital programmable Euro. In this respect, a significant
portion of the surveyed experts regard DLT as the appropriate technology for the
implementation of a digital programmable Euro.

Our results provide a number of implications. First, banks should not solely regard Libra and
CBDC as a threat, but also as a reason to take innovative action to adjust their business
models as well as to generate new profitable services. First, banks could become essential
pillars in the Libra and CBDC system in order to generate returns. In addition, banks may
provide services within the scope of their traditional range of operations, such as custody and
distribution of digital money, along with services such as AML and KYC. Third, a digital
programmable Euro enables the programmability of money through smart contracts and
thereby enables automated processes as well as financial services such as interest payments,
26

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

loans, escrow accounts, leasing and factoring. Therefore, a digital programmable Euro could
also yield efficiency gains for banks. Fourth, with the introduction of a digital programmable
Euro, a high degree of interoperability could be achieved across multiple payment
ecosystems. Such interoperability is of particular importance when considering the
requirements of the machine economy, in which machines such as cars, industrial plants or
sensors are also involved in processing payments. In this context, banks could act as
accelerators to develop an interoperability standard in a banking consortium.

It should be noted that further research on this subject is required as this study is exposed to
limitations. Our sample of 51 experts may not be sufficient to obtain a full picture of the
implications of Libra, CBDC and the digital programmable Euro for European banks. Future
research could, therefore, increase the sample size and the geographic reach of the surveyed
experts. Moreover, a sample bias could also result from the disproportionate origin of a large
fraction of the experts from Germany. We acknowledge that the discussions about the digital
programmable Euro, Libra and CBDCs are mainly conceptional as these initiatives are not live
yet. Therefore, high uncertainties about the exact design of these initiatives remain.
Nevertheless, now is the time for banks to develop positions, strengthen them and ultimately
create new business opportunities.

27

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

7.

Bibliography

Auer, R. & Boehme, R. (2020). The technology of retail central bank digital currency. BIS
Quarterly Review March. Basel.
Bundesverband deutscher Banken. (2020). Europe’s answer to Libra – potential and
prerequisites

of

a

programmable

euro.

Retrieved

July

24,

2020,

from

https://en.bankenverband.de/newsroom/comments/europe-answer-libra/.

Bank for International Settlements (2020). BIS Annual Economic Report 2020: III. Central
banks and payments in the digital era. Basel.

Bech, M. L. & Garratt, R. (2017). Central bank cryptocurrencies. BIS Quarterly Review
September. Basel.

Bindseil, U. (2020). Tiered CBDC and the financial system. ECB Working Paper Series, No.
2351. Frankfurt am Main.
Boar, C., Holden, H., & Wadsworth, A. (2020). Impending arrival – a sequel to the survey on
central bank digital currency. BIS Papers, No. 107. Basel.

Chapman, J., Garratt, R., Hendry, S., McCormack, A., & McMahon, W. (2017). Project Jasper:
Are Distributed Wholesale Payment Systems Feasible Yet? Financial System Review,
1–11.

CoinMarketCap. (2020). Top 100 Cryptocurrencies by Market Capitalization. Retrieved July
10, 2020, from https://coinmarketcap.com/1/.

Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2015). Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures
for Developing Grounded Theory (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, Inc.

European Central Bank. (2019). Exploring anonymity in central bank digital currencies. IN
FOCUS, 1(4), 1–11.

28

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

FinTechRat beim Bundesministerium der Finanzen. (2020). Der digitale, programmierbare
Euro.

Gläser, J., & Laudel, G. (2009). Experteninterviews und qualitative Inhaltsanalyse - als
Instrumente rekonstruierender Untersuchungen (3rd ed.). Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für
Sozialwissenschaften.

Griffoli, M. T. M., Peria, M. M. S. M., Agur, M. I., Ari, M. A., Kiff, M. J., Popescu, M. A., &
Rochon, M. C. (2018). Casting Light on Central Bank Digital Currencies. International
Monetary Fund Staff Discussion Notes No. 18/08.

Gross,

J.,

Herz,

B.,

&

Schiller,

J.

(forthcoming).

Bitcoin,

Libra

und

digitale

Zentralbankwährungen - auf dem Weg in ein neues Geldsystem? Wirtschaftsdienst.

Houben, A. et al. (2018). Central bank digital currencies. Joint report by the Committee on
Payments and Market Infrastructures and the Markets Committee. Bank for International
Settlements. Basel.

Kaiser, R. (2014). Qualitative Experteninterviews: Konzeptionelle Grundlagen und praktische
Durchführung. In Qualitative Experteninterviews (1st ed.). Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für
Sozialwissenschaften.

Klein, M., Gross, J., & Sandner, P. (2020). The Digital Euro and the Role of DLT for Central
Bank

Digital

Currencies.

Frankfurt

am

Main.

Retrieved

from

http://explore-

ip.com/2020_The-Digital-Euro-and-the-Role-of-DLT-for-Central-Bank-DigitalCurrencies.pdf.

Kumhof, M. & Noone, C. (2018). Central bank digital currencies - design principles and
balance sheet implications. Bank of England Staff WP No. 725.

Libra

Association

(2020).

Libra

White

Paper.

Retrieved

July

10,

2020,

from

https://libra.org/en-US/white-paper/?noredirect=en-US.

Mersch, Y. (2018). Virtual or virtueless? The evolution of money in the digital age. Lecture at
the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum. February 8, 2018. London.

29

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

Panetta, F. (2018). 21st century cash: central banking, technological innovation and digital
currency. In Gnan , E. & Masciandaro, D. (eds.). Do We Need Central Bank Digital
Currency? (pp. 23-32). SUERF Conference Proceedings018/2, 23-32.

Pope, C., Ziebland, S., & Mays, N. (2000). Qualitative research in health care: Analyzing
qualitative data. The British Medical Journal, 320, 114-116.

PYMNTS.com (2020). ECB policy maker tells banks to seek better alternatives to Libra.
Retrieved May 30, 2020, from https://www.pymnts.com/cryptocurrency/2020/ecb-policymaker-tells-banks-to-seek-better-alternatives-to-libra/.

Saunders, M., Lewis, P., & Thornhill, A. (2009). Research methods for business students (5th
ed.). Harlow: Pearson Education Limited. Retrieved from www.pearsoned.co.uk.

Strohhecker, J. (2008). Wissenschaftlich Arbeiten: Techniken und Konventionen (2nd ed.).
Frankfurt am Main: Frankfurt School Verlag.

Weisbrodt, J., & Gross, J. (2020). CBDC pioneers: Which countries are currently testing a
retail

central

bank

digital

currency?

Retrieved

July

10,

2020,

from

https://medium.com/@jonas.ku1994/cbdc-pioneers-which-countries-are-currentlytesting-a-retail-central-bank-digital-currency-49333be477f4.

World Bank (2018). Financial inclusion on the rise, but gaps remain, global findex database
shows. Retrieved July 23, 2020, from https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/pressrelease/2018/04/19/financial-inclusion-on-the-rise-but-gaps-remain-global-findexdatabase-shows

World Bank (2019). Record high remittances sent globally in 2018. Retrieved July 15, 2020,
from

https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2019/04/08/record-high-

remittances-sent-globally-in-2018.

Zikmund, W. (2003). Business Research Methods (8th ed.). Boston: Cengage Learning.

30

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

Appendix A: Expert interview participants
No.

ID

Field of work

Country

Profession

1

A1

Academia

Germany

Professor

2

A2

Academia

Germany

Research Assistant

3

A3

Academia

Switzerland

Research Assistant

4

A4

Academia

Switzerland

Professor

5

A5

Academia

Denmark

Research Assistant

6

A6

Academia

Germany

Professor

7

A7

Academia

Spain

Research Assistant

8

A8

Academia

Republic of
Korea

Research Assistant

9

A9

Academia

Switzerland

Professor

10

B1

Banking

Germany

Chief Economist and Head of Research

11

B2

Banking

Germany

Digital Markets Development Manager

12

B3

Banking

Germany

Managing Director

13

B4

Banking

Germany

Digital Office

14

B5

Banking

Germany

CFO

15

B6

Banking

Germany

Senior Trader

16

B7

Banking

Germany

Undisclosed

17

C1

Central Banking

Pan-European

Undisclosed

18

C2

Central Banking

Germany

Undisclosed

19

C3

Central Banking

Ukraine

Undisclosed

20

C4

Central Banking

United States

Undisclosed

21

D1

Associations

Germany

Head of Research

22

D2

Associations

Germany

Undisclosed

23

D3

Associations

Germany

Director of Economics

24

D4

Associations

Germany

Research Assistant

25

D5

Associations

Germany

Partner Lawyer

26

E1

International
Organization

United States

Economist

27

F1

Consultancy

Germany

Director Digital Finance

28

F2

Consultancy

Germany

Research Assistant

29

F3

Consultancy

Germany

Research Assistant

30

F4

Consultancy

Germany

Senior Expert

31

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

31

F5

Consultancy

Germany

Expert Principle

32

F6

Consultancy

Germany

Knowledge Specialist

33

I1

Industry

Switzerland

Chief Economist

34

I2

Industry

Barbados

Executive Vice Chairman

35

I3

Industry

Germany

Project Leader

36

I4

Industry

Germany

Business Expert

37

I5

Industry

Germany

Research Assistant

38

I6

Industry

Denmark

Research Assistant

39

I7

Industry

Germany

CTO

40

I8

Industry

Germany

Consultant

41

I9

Industry

Germany

CEO

42

I10

Industry

Germany

Founder and CEO

43

I11

Industry

Germany

Chief Business Development Officer

44

I12

Industry

Canada

Solution Architect

45

I14

Industry

Germany

Consultant

46

I13

Industry

United Kingdom CEO

47

L1

Lawyer

Germany

Legal Partner

48

L2

Lawyer

Germany

Head of Digital Assets and DeFi

49

O1

Others

Germany

Co-founder

50

O2

Others

Germany

Head of Innovation

51

O3

Others

Germany

Research Assistant

32

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3663142

