CRYPTOCURRENCY IN INDIA: TO BAN OR NOT TO BAN1
Cryptocurrencies are digital representations of value that can be stored and transferred
digitally. Simply put, it is a type of digital currency or a medium of exchange just like the US
dollar. They function autonomously, unencumbered by traditional banking and government
oversight. Countries have repeatedly attempted to implement measures to regulate
Cryptocurrency or ban it altogether. This article analyzes India‟s stance on Cryptocurrency and
will also look as to how the Cryptocurrency is regulated in various jurisdictions.
Timeline of Events
Since 2012 there have been a large number of Cryptocurrency exchanges operating in India,
including the likes of Zebpay, CoinDCX, or Unocoin amongst others. These crypto exchange
platforms managed to provide much needed depth and volume to the Indian crypto market until
2013 when Reserve Bank of India („RBI‟), the Central Bank of India, issued a Press Release to
caution the common populace against dealing in virtual currencies. However, its transaction
volume and popularity in general public skyrocketed when the Central Government announced
demonetization of high denomination notes in November 2016 to promote digital payment
services over traditional payment processing systems. This growing popularity of
Cryptocurrencies compelled RBI to issue regular Press Releases in February 2017 and December
2017 reiterating concerns regarding virtual currencies and cautioning the general public about the
risks associated with it.
In November 2017 the Government of India constituted a high level Inter-ministerial
Committee („the Committee‟) under the chairmanship of Shri Subhash Chandra Garg, Secretary,
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, to study concerns pertaining to Virtual
Currencies and to propose specific actions that may be taken in relation thereto. The Committee
in its report of February 2019 recommended a blanket ban on private Cryptocurrencies in India.
After regular cautions via Press Releases in the previous year, The RBI in 2018 issued
a circular thereby prohibiting banks and financial institutions from dealing in and from providing
services that facilitate dealing in virtual currencies. However, in March 2020, this circular was
struck down by a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court of India („SC‟) in Internet and Mobile
Association of India v. Reserve Bank of India, (2020 SCC Online SC 275), observing that since

Aman Kumar Yadav, „Cryptocurrency in India: To ban or not to ban‟ (The RMLNLU Law Review Blog, 2 March
2021), available at: https://rmlnlulawreview.com/2021/03/02/cryptocurrency-in-india-to-ban-or-not-to-ban.
1

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3803471

Cryptocurrencies are not banned in India and pose no discernible risk, the deprivation of
Cryptocurrency exchanges from accessing banking and payments channels would be
disproportionate.
Countries that have not banned the Virtual Currency
Some of the notable jurisdictions that have a comprehensive legislative framework to regulate
Cryptocurrency include Australia, Japan, Singapore, United Arab Emirates („UAE‟) amongst
others. Australia has been one of the most progressive jurisdictions when it comes to the
adoption of Cryptocurrency. Both Cryptocurrencies and exchanges are legal in Australia and are
subject to capital gains tax. Similarly, Japan, in 2020, amended its regulation governing „virtual
currency exchange services‟ thereby necessitating the businesses offering virtual currency
exchange services to register with the Financial Services Agency in Japan. Moreover, Central
Bank of Japan, i.e., Bank of Japan on July 2, 2020, released a report entitled “Technological
Challenges in Having Central Bank Digital Currencies Function as Cash Equivalents”,
acknowledged the possibility of using central bank digital currencies as cash equivalents and
issues involved in the same. In Singapore, Cryptocurrency is legal and any kind of digital
payments tokens are regulated by the Monetary Authority of Singapore under the Payments
Services Act, 2019. Similarly one of the financial free market zones, Abu Dhabi Global Markets
(ADGM) of UAE uses the term „digital assets‟ as an umbrella expression to regulate digital
securities, crypto assets, utility tokens and fiat tokens etc. Here, crypto assets are regulated by the
Financial Services Regulatory Authority (FSRA) which provides certain mandatory requirements
for operating crypto asset business.
Countries that have banned Cryptocurrency
In Latin America, Cryptocurrency regulations vary greatly. Countries like Bolivia have effectively
banned crypto while others, like Brazil, and Mexico have implemented regulations to govern
crypto. In jurisdictions like the United Kingdom (UK), although crypto is not considered to be
legal tender, Cryptocurrency exchanges are legal. Moreover, gains or losses on crypto are subject
to capital gains tax. The UK has been proactive in its approach concerning Cryptocurrency, in
July 2019, The U.K.‟s Financial Conduct Authority („FCA‟) released a guidance report on crypto
assets clarifying which tokens fall under its jurisdiction. Following this, the U.K. Treasury in
January 2021, released a consultation paper to gather feedback from stakeholders concerning the
government‟s regulatory approach to cryptocurrencies. Canada allows the use of Cryptocurrency
and the same is regulated under securities laws. Furthermore, digital currency transactions are
subject to tax laws as the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada treats it as a commodity.
Primary concerns that nations have regarding Cryptocurrency is that they believe it facilitates

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3803471

criminality, including money laundering and terror financing. However, progress has been
witnessed as private firms can now help in de-anonymising Bitcoin transactions to trace the illicit
activity facilitated by Cryptocurrency.
The way forward
While countries like South Korea are planning to put a legislative framework to regulate the
Cryptocurrencies and Crypto exchanges, on the other hand, countries like India are considering
imposing an effective ban on digital assets and digital currencies. The Lower House of the
Parliament in its bulletin, released on January 30, 2021, indicates that Indian parliament is
planning to table The Cryptocurrency and Regulation of Official Digital Currency Bill, 2021 („the
Bill‟) to ban „private‟ Cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and introduce its own digital currency
which is often termed as „Central Bank Digital Currency‟ („CBDC‟) like Tunisia‟s eDinar
(launched in 2015), Senegal‟s eCFA (2016), Venezuela‟s Petromoneda (2018) or the most recent
China‟s digital Yuan (2020). Some notable jurisdictions that are experimenting with the CBDC,
include France, Canada and Sweden.
India‟s stance of regulating the Cryptocurrency by introducing the state backed digital currency
which will be regulated by the RBI is worrisome, however, it doesn‟t come as a surprise as both,
the Committees‟ report of June 2019 and the Draft Bill, Banning of Cryptocurrency and
Regulation of Official Digital Currency Bill, 2019 were indicative of the same. The approach
similar to that of China, also indicates that India acknowledges the potential application of the
virtual currency going forward. Since, there wasn‟t any sui generis legislation to govern
Cryptocurrencies, this Bill will provide clarity as to how it should be regulated, however,
uncertainty exists as to (i) what exactly is „private‟ Cryptocurrencies, (ii) whether
Cryptocurrencies will be treated as a 'currency' or a 'stock' or there will be an outright ban on
dealing with them, and (iii) whether there will be any tax mechanism in place to check Crypto
trading as previously speculated in December 2020.
Furthermore, assuming that the CBDC issued by the Indian government works on a two tier
model, i.e. it would have two layers of protection, with one layer through the Distributed Ledger
Technology (DLT) technology and another through its centralized system then the concerns
relating to security in dealing with Cryptocurrencies can be suitably dealt with. Going forward, it
is paramount to have an effective dialogue on the Bill that includes taking note of the
stakeholder‟s comment and addressing their concerns, otherwise banning the Cryptocurrency in
a hurry would only invite prolonged litigation in the apex court of the country leaving crypto

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3803471

traders in dire straits, resulting in uneasiness in the sector which is destined to accelerate to
greater heights in India. A campaign (#Indiawantscrypto) is being shared across social media in
response to government‟s proposed plan of banning Cryptocurrency which has draft templates
pointing out the positives of the Cryptocurrency trading as to how it is innovative and can help
India in archiving the goal of $5 Trillion economy that too with Self Reliant India campaign.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3803471

