Dialogue on Global Digital Finance Governance

Technical Paper 1.2

Digital currencies and CBDC
impacts on least developed
countries (LDCs)
Katherine Foster, Sofie Blakstad, Sangita Gazi and Martijn Bos

The findings of the Dialogue on Global Digital Finance
Governance are packaged into three thematic areas:

Theme 1
BigFintechs and their impacts on
sustainable development
• T
 echnical Paper 1.1 BigFintechs and their
impacts on sustainable development
• Technical Paper 1.1B BigFintechs and their
impacts on macroeconomic policies
• Technical Paper 1.2 Digital currencies and
CBDC impacts on least developed countries

Theme 2
Corporate governance innovations
• T
 echnical Paper 2.1 BigFintechs and the UN SDGs:
the role of corporate governance innovations

Theme 3
BigFintechs and international governance,
policymaking and the SDGs
• T
 echnical Paper 3.1 Policymakers, BigFintechs and
the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
• T
 echnical Paper 3.2 BigFintechs and international
governance, policymaking and the UN Sustainable
Development Goals: the SDGs in the international
governance of finance
• T
 echnical Paper 3.3 A principles-based approach
to the governance of BigFintechs

Executive Summary
The purpose of this Technical Paper is to garner a more
robust understanding of the potential macroeconomic
impacts and related regulatory challenges of central bank
digital currencies (CBDCs) and other digital currency
initiatives on developing countries. This paper begins
from a point of recognition that the landscape of digital
currencies, their associated taxonomy as well as related
regulations are still evolving alongside their potential
implications. As such, we focus on the different types
of digital currencies previously in circulation, delineating
these from those on the near and immediate horizon.
We employ an umbrella definition to encompass CBDCs
and digital ledger technology (DLT)-based currencies
including stablecoins, as well as earlier versions of digital
money, as subsets of digital currency to examine the
evolution of macroeconomic impacts on developing
countries as well as the emerging regulatory gaps.
We cluster key elements and draw assumptions
across common parameters in research, for the sake
of consistency and to retain the focus on advancing
the understanding of the broader macroeconomic
impacts on least developed countries (LDCs).
We begin with the evolution of mobile money and
e-money as a subset of digital currencies and their well
understood positive impact on financial inclusion. We
touch briefly upon the regulatory challenges related to
the near monopolies of mobile financial services providers
and the implications on the traditional commercial
banking sector as well as for consumer protection. We
also examine the implications of regulatory gaps and
risks related to e-money including the market dominance
of BigFintech (BFT) companies offering e-money. The

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

1

The Dialogue on Global Digital Finance Governance
was established by the UN Secretary General’s Task
Force on Digital Financing of the SDGs. During its
investigations, the Task Force recognized that
digitalization is not only reshaping the world of
finance; it is also driving the emergence of a new
generation of global, dominant digital finance
platforms (BigFintechs) with increasing cross-border
spillover effects on many areas of sustainable
development across the world, particularly
in developing economies.
The potential impacts of these platforms are both
positive and negative, and one of the main challenges
in addressing them is that existing policy approaches
to BigFintechs have mostly focused on narrow,
although important, financial stability, consumer
protection and market integrity issues, and some
aspects of data, Internet and competition regulation,
but have remained largely disconnected from the
broader SDG/ESG debate. Another issue is that the
governing arrangements of such platforms have
seldom involved developing economies, where their
impacts are often strongest, and the potential for
transformation is greatest.
The Dialogue was established to explore the nexus
of BigFintechs and sustainable development. Its goal
is to catalyse governance innovations that take
greater account of the SDG impacts of BigFintechs
and are more inclusive of the voices of developing
nations. To this end, the Dialogue has produced a
series of Technical Papers that bring new,
complementary perspectives on these issues.
The papers have been drafted by commanding
experts in the field and have been peer-reviewed
by leading institutions and academics.

paper also examines BFTs from the perspective of their
use of government-issued digital currencies and/or
development or use of private-issued digital currencies.
An examination of stablecoins is then undertaken with
regard to the implications and relationship with existing
global payment systems, outlining the limited benefits for
developing countries in comparison to existing payment
systems. Global stablecoins such as the proposed
Diem are examined with a specific emphasis related to
the macroeconomic implications for LDCs. Likewise,
the paper provides a targeted analysis of the potential
macroeconomic implications of CBDCs particularly for
LDCs, drawing on key examples of CBDC and digital
currencies that have been launched or are being piloted.
We provide a section on the implications of digital
currencies in the African context as it is home to most
of the world’s LDCs, and is an ongoing focal point for
mobile money, financial inclusion technology and digital
currencies. The implications of the COVID-19 pandemic
are also discussed for the African context as are the global
considerations of shadow banking.
The paper concludes with a summary of the potential
risks and macroeconomic implications both nationally and
internationally including those related to the fragmented
regulatory approaches as well as the emerging
technology and governance structures that do not fall
within traditional regulatory oversight and mechanisms.
It extrapolates key points to better inform the dialogue
around a new generation of governance innovations to
address the emerging trends, risks and vulnerabilities,
particularly in LDCs, and around a potential gap between
national fiscal and monetary policy and the capabilities of
nations to execute such policies.

The following paper is Technical Paper 1.2 under
Theme 1.
The Dialogue on Global Digital Finance Governance
is hosted by the Swiss and Kenyan Governments and
stewarded jointly by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and United Nations Capital
Development Fund (UNCDF).

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

2

About the authors
Katherine Foster - Executive Strategy Officer, Open Earth Foundation (USA); Member ESMA Financial Innovation
Standing Committee Consultative Working Group and the EU Blockchain Observatory; co-author IIED Brief Digital
technologies for an inclusive, low-carbon future that puts people first.
Sofie Blakstad - CEO, impact Fintech start-up hiveonline; author, Fintech Revolution: Universal Inclusion in the New
Financial Ecosystem.
Sangita Gazi - Research Fellow, Asian Institute of International Financial Law (AIIFL), University of Hong Kong (HKU);
PhD researcher at the Faculty of Law, HKU, focusing on the cross-border and monetary policy implications of central
bank digital currency (CBDC) in emerging economies.
Martijn Bos - Financial Technology & Financial Inclusion Consultant, co-author of The European Fintech Landscape in
Green Digital Finance.
Copyright © 2021 UNDP, UNCDF
All rights reserved.
The views expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent those of the United Nations,
including UNCDF and UNDP, or their Member States.

Contents
INTRODUCTION												4
SCOPE AND STRUCTURE OF THE PAPER									5
EMERGING APPLICATIONS FOR DIGITAL CURRENCIES								5
MOBILE MONEY												6
E-MONEY													8
STABLECOINS													10
MACROECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS OF STABLECOINS							10
GLOBAL STABLECOINS (GSCS)											11
MACROECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS OF DIEM: BFT’S ADOPTION OF A GSC					

12

CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCIES (CBDCS)								12
MACROECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS OF CBDCS								15
NATIONAL BANK OF CAMBODIA’S PROJECT BAKONG								17
HUB AND SPOKE MODEL IN CHINA: DC/EP									17
RIKSBANK’S E-KRONA												17
CBDCS VERSUS STABLECOINS											18
COMBINED MACROECONOMIC IMPACTS OF CBDCS AND DIGITAL CURRENCIES ON LDCS			

19

DIGITAL CURRENCIES IN THE AFRICAN CONTEXT								19
POTENTIAL EVOLUTION OF AN AFRICAN BLOC CURRENCY							20
UNBANKED COMMUNITIES: THE FRONTLINE FOR MAINTAINING CURRENCY SOVEREIGNTY			

21

GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS: SHADOW BANKING AND COVID-19						21
KEY EXTRAPOLATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS									22

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

3

Introduction
Technology has always been a catalyst of change in
monetary and payment systems across the globe. The
Fintech-led evolution in the payments systems has seen
the concept of currency undergo transformation in an
unprecedented way.1 Although currency existed in virtual
forms before (such as mobile money and e-money),
Bitcoin’s launch in 2009 marked an alteration in the
conceptualization of ‘virtual currency’ by introducing
a cryptographic form of electronic cash operated on a
blockchain protocol—a peer-to-peer distributed ledger
technology (DLT) that securely records transactions
across computers.2 Despite the presence of DLT since
1991,3 it was Bitcoin4 that for the first time successfully
conceptualized the technology into building a peerto-peer transaction network and creating a distinct
form of cryptographically encrypted currencies, that
is cryptocurrencies. Although these blockchain-based
cryptocurrencies operated in an unregulated space for a
long time,5 with some occasional exceptions,6 they did
not gain popularity as alternative ‘currencies’7 because of
their extremely volatile and speculative nature. However,
Facebook’s proposal of ‘Libra’ (now ‘Diem’)—an assetbacked global stablecoin (GSC)—opened up a new avenue
with the prospect of creating a widely available alternative
monetary instrument to be used across a range of
payments platforms.8 With a massive global reach
among Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp users, Libra
potentially threatened the ‘sovereignty’ aspect of money
and thus triggered responses from regulators worldwide.
Subsequently, Facebook had to step back from its original
plan of adopting a multi-currency asset-pegged Libra to
issuing a single currency $-backed coin (now named Diem)
as a result of the backlash from regulators. Moreover,
Facebook’s announcement of a GSC initiative resurfaced
the need for regulation to curb the adverse impacts of
blockchain-enabled cryptocurrencies and stablecoins.9
1

2
3

4

5
6
7
8

9

 For a general discussion, see Arner D, Barberis J, Buckley R, ‘The Evolution of
Fintech: A New Post-Crisis Paradigm’, UNSW Law Research Paper No. 201662, 2016, <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2676553>.
 Nakamoto S, ‘Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System’, bitcoin, 2008,
<https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf>.
 The first DLT description which was a precursor to blockchain was Haber S,
Stornetta WS, ‘How to Time-stamp a Digital Document’, 1991, <www.anf.es/
pdf/Haber_Stornetta.pdf>.
 Stuart Harber and W Scott Stornetta first established a cryptographically secured chain of blocks; see ‘History of Blockchain’, ICAEW, <www.icaew.com/
technical/technology/blockchain/blockchain-articles/what-is-blockchain/history>.
 The regulatory responses were sporadic across the world and did not spur
until the beginning of the initial coin offering (ICO) rush.
 Such as ICO or banning cryptocurrency in many jurisdictions.
 A currency as a legal tender has three major features: (1) unit of account, (2)
store of value and (3) a medium of exchange.
 Hockett R, ‘Facebook’s Proposed Crypto-Currency: More Pisces than Libra
for Now’, Forbes, June 2019, <www.forbes.com/sites/rhockett/2019/06/20/
facebooks-proposed-crypto-currency-more-pisces-than-libra-for-now/?sh=7b684b2e2be2>.
 To address the regulatory risks around stablecoins, the Financial Stability
Board (FSB), 18 October 2019, presented a paper before the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors setting out the areas of concerns regarding
stablecoins; see ‘Regulatory Issues of Stablecoins’, Financial Stability Board,
October 2019, <www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P181019.pdf> and G-Seven
Working Group on Stablecoins, ‘Investing the Impact of Global Stablecoins’,
Bank of International Settlement, October 2019, <www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/
d187.pdf>. The following year, the FSB prepared a consultative document that
critically analyses the regulatory, supervisory and oversight challenges evolving

Recently, the United States Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency (OCC) decided to allow banks to transact
using digital assets including stablecoins.10 As Bitcoin’s
price continues to see dramatic leaps in value, it appears
that the market participants11 are also interested in
normalizing $-pegged stablecoins or even Bitcoin as
a medium of exchange, which could incentivize the
possibility of widespread adoption of blockchain-based
digital currencies.
The COVID-19 pandemic boosted the need for
‘contactless’ payment and the ‘digitalization’ of payment
systems, especially in developed and emerging
economies. Interest in DLT both from public and private
authorities also culminated in actual releases: China
developed its first ever digital form of money—Digital
Currency-Electronic Payment (DC/EP),12 and the Bahamas
introduced its US-dollar pegged central bank digital
currency (CBDC)—the Sand Dollar.13 CBDC is also taking
a regional form as the Eastern Central Caribbean Central
Bank (ECCB) rolled out its pilot of DCash—a regional
CBDC to be operated in seven island nations. Regional
collaboration is also under way to establish a single
platform for multiple CBDCs (‘m-CBDC bridge’) among the
Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Bank of Thailand, Central
Bank of the United Arab Emirates and People’s Bank of
China’s Digital Currency Institute.14
As technology remains a major catalyst in changing
the paradigm of monetary and payment systems (both
influenced by public and private authorities), there is
around the new crypto-asset class; see ‘Addressing the Regulatory, Supervisory and Oversight Challenges Raised by “Global Stablecoin” Arrangements:
Consultative Document’, The Financial Stability Board, April 2020, <www.fsb.
org/2020/04/addressing-the-regulatory-supervisory-and-oversight-challenges-raised-by-global-stablecoin-arrangements-consultative-document/>. See
also ‘Regulation, Supervision and Oversight of “Global Stablecoin” Arrangements: Final Report and High-Level Recommendations’, Financial Stability
Board, October 2020, <www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P131020-3.pdf>.
In the European Union, the EU Commission adopted comprehensive draft on
cryptoasset regulation, ‘Markets in Cryptoasset Regulation (MiCA)’, to enhance consumer and investor protection and reduce the risks associated with
digital finance; see Latham & Watkins LLP, ‘MiCA: EU Commission Publishes
Comprehensive Cryptoasset Market Regulation Proposal’, Global Fintech &
Payments Blog, October 2020, <www.fintechandpayments.com/2020/10/
mica-eu-commission-publishes-comprehensive-cryptoasset-market-regulation-proposal/>.
10 Office

of the Comptroller of the Currency [OCC] ‘Federally Chartered Banks
and Thrifts May Participate in Independent Node Verification Networks and
Use Stablecoins for Payment Activities’, Washington, January 2021, <www.
occ.gov/news-issuances/news-releases/2021/nr-occ-2021-2.html>.
11 Khatri

Y, ‘Visa Now Settles Payments in USDC Stablecoin on Ethereum
Blockchain’, The Block, March 2021; ‘PayPal Now Allows Crypto Spending at
Millions of Merchants’, The Block, March 2021; see also, Nicholas K, ‘Tesla
Now Accepts Bitcoin as Payment for Cars, Musk Says’, The Bloomberg, March
2021, <www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-03-24/you-can-now-buy-atesla-with-bitcoin-elon-musk-says>.
12 Areddy JT, ‘China Creates Its Own Digital Currency, a First for Major Economy’, The Wall Street Journal, April 2021, <www.wsj.com/articles/china-createsits-own-digital-currency-a-first-for-major-economy-11617634118>.
13 Bharathan

V, ‘Central Bank Digital Currency: The First Nationwide CDC in the
World Has Been Launched by the Bahamas’, Forbes, October 2020, <www.
forbes.com/sites/vipinbharathan/2020/10/21/central-bank-digital-currency-thefirst-nationwide-cbdc-in-the-world-has-been-launched-by-the-bahamas/?sh=11b81a5d506e>.
14 The Hong Kong Monetary Authority, ‘Fintech Co-operation between the Hong
Kong Monetary Authority and the Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates’,
Press Release, February 2021, <www.hkma.gov.hk/eng/news-and-media/
press-releases/2021/02/20210223-4/> ; see also, ‘Multiple CBDC (mCBDC)
Bridge’, Bank for International Settlements, <www.bis.org/about/bisih/topics/
cbdc/mcbdc_bridge.htm>.
4

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

also an urgency to study the large-scale macroeconomic
impacts of digital currencies and how these could
alter the dynamics of current monetary and payment
systems and global financial stability. Further, this also
demands that impacts are studied in the context of least
developed countries (LDCs) and how they influence
the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). From a cross-border aspect, digital currencies,
including CBDCs are likely to reduce transaction costs
for end-users, and hence transfer of remittance is likely
to be easier and cheaper. Adversely, depending on the
arrangements, this could provide a backdoor to avoid
economic sanctions and affect international relations
by triggering geopolitical tension.15 Digital currencies
could also pose risks and policy challenges, including
impacts on the ability of central banks to implement
monetary policy, and of governments to implement
fiscal policy. This paper examines these applications
and effects, as well as knock-on effects created in
socio-economic spheres, particularly in LDCs.
Overall, we observe that the potential availability of
foreign currency-denominated CBDCs and GSCs in LDCs
could create a growing gap between national fiscal and
monetary policy, and the capabilities of nations to execute
these policies. CBDCs issued by global superpowers
and GSCs denominated in their currencies, are likely to
impact central banks’ control of money supply in LDCs
through currency substitution16 and in developed countries
because of increased efficiencies in commercial or market
settlements.17 Such impacts can be mitigated through
regulations18 and design of CBDCs. Despite the technical
opportunity to implement monetary policies via CBDCs
with a variable interest-rate, it should be noted that no
country has yet indicated its intention to do so.
The acceleration in the issuance of CBDCs is likely to
impact both how the commercial banking sector is used
to implement monetary policy as well as its pivotal
role in moving and storing value. Monetary policy and
financial supervision need to be revised internationally
to acknowledge these changes and to mitigate potential
negative impacts.

15

16

17

18


Biggs
J, ‘Venezuela Tries to Avoid US Sanctions by Trading in Rubles and
Crypto’, Coindesk, May 2019, <www.coindesk.com/venezuela-tries-to-avoidus-sanctions-by-trading-in-rubles-and-crypto>.
CBDC design dictates a wide range of features such as whether the CBDC is
used only domestically or also internationally, capital controls which could limit
cross-border impacts and barriers to entry preventing it from being used as a
substitute currency.
CBDCs as a settlement instrument can decrease settlement periods for securities, as well as increasing real-time gross settlement (RTGS) opportunities in
commercial markets.
LDCs could, for example, restrict use of foreign-denominated CBDCs or
GSCs in their countries, although such bans would be hard to enforce without
restricting Internet access, especially in the informal economy. Alternatively,
regulators could force private issuers to restrict sale of their currencies; however, again, this would be difficult to enforce, while regulators lack motivation
to constrain opportunities for national commercial growth at the expense of
foreign countries.

Scope and structure of the paper
As CBDC is emerging as a topic of immediate interest
for central banks around the world, the debate about
technical structures, accessibility, role of the commercial
banking system and the private sector is ongoing. While
we refer to some of these implications, discussion of
alternative CBDC structures is outside the scope of this
paper. For the sake of consistency and focus we are
clustering some elements, and drawing conclusions and
assumptions across the common parameters of those
elements, based on current research and policy dialogues.
The scope of this paper is on potential macroeconomic
implications of CBDCs (and digital currencies), with a
specific focus on the implications for LDCs.
•T
 his paper discusses the growth of money in ‘digital’19
form,20 and is structured around the delineation between
the different types of digital currencies in circulation
today and those on the immediate and near horizon. It
evaluates their current and potential macroeconomic
impacts and regulatory challenges on LDCs from
national and international perspectives.
•T
 his paper will explore, in a limited capacity, the
influence of BigFintech (BFT) companies and their
use of government-issued digital currencies and/or
development or use of private-issued digital currencies.
It is important to note that the supply of both GSCs and,
more recently, CBDCs, with China’s DC/EP, is seeing
accelerated growth.
•T
 his paper notes that domestic CBDCs and, to an
extent, domestic denominated stablecoins21 have the
potential to serve—intentionally or unintentionally—as
a technical instrument for implementing monetary
or fiscal policy. The design of CBDCs impacts their
availability (i.e. barriers to adoption) as well as whether
they can be used to implement monetary or fiscal
policy—through applying interest rates, taxation or other
programmable elements which are likely to be subject
to political challenges. However, CBDC design is not
within the scope of this paper.

19

Digitally

or electronically issued, stored-complex, rather understood in the
absence of physical cash.
20 The scope of this paper does not allow for an econometric assessment of
CBDCs in relation to LDC market functioning. This is also not yet fully feasible
because of the nascent and rapidly shifting landscape. In addition, the scope
does not encompass decentralized cryptocurrencies, which until now have
not served in a substantial role as ‘money’ in society and have faced barriers
to widespread adoption including a lack of regulatory clarity over classification
of digital assets, limited utility as a payment instrument, a lack of accessible
tools, compatibility with payment devices and terminals, price volatility of
cryptocurrencies, limited supply and negative public perception.
21 Although domestic-denominated stablecoins are unlikely to be used directly to
implement monetary or fiscal policy, they could help maintain money supply,
reduce the risk of currency substitution and increase visibility of commercial
activities towards wider collection of taxes.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

5

•T
 he macroeconomic impacts of CBDCs must be
considered in terms of design choices which are
still highly theoretical. The impacts could also vary
depending on the technology used, size of the economy
where it is issued, the regulation and macroeconomic
policy of the issuing country and other variable factors
(such as strong and mature financial institutions); and
therefore, these impacts are not fully predictable at this
stage as very few economies have adopted CBDCs.
•T
 he paper traces to the earlier versions of digital
money, such as Fintech-led mobile money and
e-money, and captures the gradual evolution of
current discourse of digital currencies, including
privately issued stablecoins, GSCs and sovereignissued digital currencies. Nonetheless, it recognizes
that the landscape of digital currencies and their
associated taxonomy and regulations are still
evolving alongside their potential implications.

Emerging applications
for digital currencies
Digital currencies, whether issued by a sovereign central
bank, a private sector organization or a community,
represent both an innovation in payment systems22
and a form of virtual money.23 The key innovation
behind DLT-based digital currency is the introduction of
‘distributed ledger’, which allows a currency to be used
in a decentralized payment system and to be applied to a
host of other distributed data systems, with applications
ranging from transaction monitoring to certification.
Although the concept of currency in ‘digital or virtual’
form is not new (such as mobile money and e-money),
we argue that the application of emerging technology in
currency-creation requires closer attention because of the
technology involved (DLT and non-DLT) and its potential
impact on developing macroeconomic risks depending
on the design choices and motives and the entities
associated (public and private). Therefore, for the purpose
of this paper, we define digital currencies as an umbrella
term that (1) involves the use of DLT and non-DLT-based
technologies; or (2) has an exchange or store-value; or
(3) is generated, stored and transferred through a digital
technology solution. DLT-based currencies are a subset of
digital currencies,24 as are mobile money and e-money.

Mobile money
Mobile money, usually delivered via mobile phones
through a mobile financial services (MFS) provider, was
one of the earliest forms of Fintech innovation which
has significantly impacted the lives of unbanked and
underserved populations by giving them access to
standard financial services or alternative financial services.
Starting with M-Pesa in Kenya in 2007, mobile money
has established a strong foothold in Africa with tens of
millions of customers. Usually, mobile money originates
from users transferring mobile credits in lieu of cash
which is escrowed against fiat currency by the MFS
provider. As the infrastructure involved in mobile money
does not critically require a formal financial institution
account to be used, mobile money is convenient, cheap
and user-friendly, and thus has become a means of
financial inclusion for millions of people across the world.
Given the increasing popularity of mobile money because
of its conveniences, BFTs are also collaborating with the
MFS providers to expand the customer base of both.
For example, Ant Financial has recently entered into
a strategic partnership with bKash—the largest MFS
network in Bangladesh with more than 180,000 agents
and over 30 million registered accounts.25 In a country of
160 million, bKash has established a major infrastructure
empowering millions of unbanked and underbanked by
giving them access to financial services without requiring
them to open a traditional bank account.
In hindsight, MFS providers have given rise to near
monopolies,26 having more customers than banks in their
native countries.27 In addition, they usually do not require
banking licences because they are not providing full
banking services. Although some countries have adopted
MFS regulations (such as Bangladesh), major mobile
money providers like M-Pesa and Ant Financial initially
requested regulatory guidance but have been allowed
to operate under a special licence by their respective
regulators, with Ant Group founding MyBank via a
formal banking licence in 2015.28 These special licences
were awarded because the benefits were recognized as
significant by government regulators and international
agencies such as the United Nations and the World Bank
Group. For example, Ant Financial helped move the
25

22 That

is, any system enabling the transfer of monetary value to settle financial
transactions between parties.
23 That is, a digital instrument used as a medium of exchange or store of value
that facilitates economic activity such as manufacturing or trade, and the
transfer of purchasing power from the present to the future, aka savings, or a
unit of account.
24 There is disagreement on whether pure cryptocurrencies (as opposed to stablecoins) can be considered a store of value because of their price volatility, or
a medium of exchange because of the speed and cost of some cryptocurrency
transactions. See Blakstad S, Allen R ‘Fintech Revolution: Universal Inclusion
in the New Financial Ecosystem’, Palgrave, 2018, <www.palgrave.com/gp/
book/9783319760131>.

26

27

28

‘bKash

and Ant Financial in strategic partnership to promote financial inclusion
for the unbanked in Bangladesh’, bKash, April 2018, <www.bkash.com/
node/2473>.
See,

for example, ‘Interoperability needed to break monopoly of MFS market’,
The Business Standard, August 2020, <https://tbsnews.net/economy/banking/
interoperability-needed-break-monopoly-mfs-market-123337>.
M-Pesa

had 24.91m customers in Kenya as of end 2019 (‘Financial highlights’,
Safaricom, 2020, <www.safaricom.co.ke/annualreport_2020/financial-highlights/>), whereas KCB Bank, Kenya’s largest bank by customer numbers,
has 21.6m across six countries including Kenya (‘About us’, KCB Bank Group
Kenya, <https://ke.kcbgroup.com/about-us>).
Both

M-Pesa and Ant were awarded ‘special licences under their respective
regulatory regimes, with Ant Group founding MyBank with a formal banking
licence in 2015.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

6

banked population of China from 64 per cent to 80 per
cent in less than a decade.29 Similarly, M-Pesa, starting
from an even lower base in Kenya, has helped increase
the per centage of the population that is part of the formal
financial sector from about 20 per cent to more than
60 per cent over a 10-year period (2007–2017).30
With the growth in customer bases, M-Pesa and the
Chinese payments platforms are now offering a range of
services including lending backed by financial institutions31
and increasingly off their own books, such as Ant Group’s
MyBank and M-Pesa’s Fuliza.32 The BFTs’ unfettered
growth in combination with light regulation gives rise

to significant regulatory concerns—the monopolistic
behaviour of BFTs threatens the operation of the
traditional commercial banking sector and raises concerns
about consumer protection. However, regulators are
now pushing back, most recently demonstrated by the
suspension of Ant Group’s IPO33 by the People’s Bank of
China (PBOC). This occurred one day before the IPO was
to be issued, on the apparent grounds that this would
make Ant Group ‘too big’ and potentially capable of
exacerbating the SME credit bubble. To quote Forbes,
“Ant is creating the conditions for a repeat of the same
sort of ‘subprime’ credit crisis that triggered the 2008
financial debacle in the U.S.”.34

Graph 1: The Money Flower: A taxonomy of money
Central bankissued

Electronic

Virtual
currency

Universally
accessible

Peer-to-peer
Settlement
or reserve
accounts

Bank
deposits,
mobile
money

Deposited
currency
accounts

CBCC
(wholesale)

CBCC
(retail)
Cash

Cryptocurrency

Local
currency

Cryptocurrency
(wholesale)

Commodity
money

Source: Bank for International Settlement 2018

29

30

31

32

See, for example, Tattersall M, ‘Ant Group has filed for its much-anticipated
IPO’, Business Insider, August 2020, <www.businessinsider.com/ant-groupfiles-for-ipo-after-enjoying-strong-revenue-growth-2020-8#:~:text=Ant%20
Group%20has%20over%201,year%20increase%2C%20per%20the%20
filing>.
Reuters Staff, ‘M-Pesa helps drive up Kenyans’ access to financial services
- study’, Reuters, April 2019, <www.reuters.com/article/kenya-banking/mpesa-helps-drive-up-kenyans-access-to-financial-services-study-idUSL8N21L2HK>; see also World Bank, ‘Findex Global Database’, <https://globalfindex.
worldbank.org/>.
See, for example, Oludimu T, ‘Safaricom launches Fuliza, an overdraft facility
for its M-Pesa customers’, Techpoint.africa, January 2019, <https://techpoint.
africa/2019/01/10/safaricom-launches-mpesa-fuliza-feature/>.
See, for example, Shah R, Kumar R, ‘Ant Group now makes more money from
lending than from payments’, Tellimer, October 2020, <https://tellimer.com/
article/ant-group-now-makes-more-money-from-lending-t>.

33

34


Wade
M, Teracino E, ‘China clips Jack Ma’s wings with Ant Group IPO
delay’, Nikkei Asia, November 2020, <https://asia.nikkei.com/Opinion/
China-clips-Jack-Ma-s-wings-with-Ant-Group-IPO-delay?utm_source=taboola&utm_medium=msn-msn&utm_campaign=BA%20HK%20
RSS&utm_term=1000408&utm_content=RSS&tblci=GiCnObspucYuTOIGm7CNhodn_NpDbsaepUZO8EamIyAX6CDAhkE#tblciGiCnObspucYuTOIGm7CNhodn_NpDbsaepUZO8EamIyAX6CDAhkE>.
C
 alhoun G, ‘Why China Stopped The Ant Group’s IPO (Part 2): Ant’s Dangerous
Business Model’, Forbes, November 2020, <www.forbes.com/sites/georgecalhoun/2020/11/16/why-china-stopped-the-ant-groups-ipopart-2-ants-dangerousbusiness-model/?sh=3a26725658bf>.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

7

e-money
Fully backed by fiat currency, electronic money
(e-money) can be an umbrella term to include money
held in pre-paid cards, electronic wallet or web-based
services, such as PayPal.35 With the growth of BFTs’
product portfolios and their adoption of more innovative
technologies, and in the light of recent announcements
by Visa36 and others, e-money should be assumed to
include stablecoins.37 For the purpose of this paper,
we use the European Union’s definition: “e-money is
a digital alternative to cash”, which “allows users to
make cashless payments with money stored on a card
or a phone, or over the Internet”.38 e-money can be
used to transact between individuals and businesses
via a mobile app or other digital platform. Examples of
e-money include WeChat Pay and Alipay’s e-wallets, both
widely used in China. The major difference between
mobile money and e-money is, in the case of e-money,
the e-wallet is linked with the users’ existing traditional
bank accounts or credit cards, while the mobile money
wallet does not require an underlying bank account.

Amid the popularity of digital currencies, many BFT
companies, including social media companies, are
supporting e-money, leveraging the strong network
effects
as e-money is convenient, relatively cheap and ensures
faster peer-to-peer transactions. Yet, e-money carries
the risks associated with a lack of deposit insurance. For
instance, any money stored in PayPal is not covered by
the deposit insurance scheme delineated under the US
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.39 The platforms
are regulated to a lower standard and hence carry risks of
consumer protection, cybersecurity and lax enforcement
of Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements. The lack of
interchangeability and interoperability40 poses a risk that
only the largest provider will survive. Central banks could
give e-money providers access to their reserve accounts,
providing a strong protection regime for depositors with
similar regulatory requirements regarding liquidity and
KYC as commercial banks. Similar to CBDCs, this would
also mean that there is a risk of “potential and partial
disintermediation of commercial banks if some depositors
preferred holding e-money”.41
Table 1 demonstrates the current trends of digital
currencies issued and adopted across the financial
markets. The table serves to illustrate that traditional
banks and non-bank Fintechs are frontrunners in adopting
digital currencies. As this form of currency evolves, the
associated risks also change because of the varying
nature of technology used and assets involved as
collateral.

35

Firpo J, ‘E-Money – Mobile Money – Mobile Banking – What’s the Difference’,
World Bank Blogs, January 2009, <https://blogs.worldbank.org/psd/e-moneymobile-money-mobile-banking-what-s-the-difference>.
36 Dillet R, ‘Visa supports transaction settlement with USDC stablecoin’, Techcrunch, March 2021, <https://techcrunch.com/2021/03/29/
visa-supports-transaction-settlement-with-usdc-stablecoin/?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAADUMEugkSz2Bhy0BtQcXDXgWd_MpUJjXPQMkWwe3HTxfI7WcK1sN8q8WtWlUc4qjC_76kKajTwXEJ40WgM16K47qOzU2Wi7cMwFP6QUQfri5g771bcV5ftKL27zVSgbxEIzEQZUzLOdTQa3gyaF9DQ9o0G-QLYHgocrFiTVjaAK->.
37 Tobias A ‘Stablecoins, Central Bank Digital Currencies, and Cross-Border
Payments: A New Look at the International Monetary System’ IMF-Swiss
National Bank Conference, Zurich, May 2019, <www.imf.org/en/Publications/
fintech-notes/Issues/2019/07/12/The-Rise-of-Digital-Money-47097>.
38 E-money - Directive 2009/110/EC, European Commission, <https://ec.europa.
eu/info/law/e-money-directive-2009-110-ec_en>.

39

PayPal

User Agreement, <www.paypal.com/us/webapps/mpp/ua/useragreement-full#communications>.
40 There are aggregators that provide interoperability, but these come at an
additional cost.
41 Adrian T, ‘Stablecoins, Central Bank Digital Currencies, and Cross-Border
Payments: A New Look at the International Monetary System. Remarks by
Tobias Adrian at the IMF-Swiss National Bank Conference’, May 2019, <www.
imf.org/en/News/Articles/2019/05/13/sp051419-stablecoins-central-bank-digital-currencies-and-cross-border-payments>.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

8

Table 1: The current landscape of digital currencies42
Issuer

43

44

Collateral

Risk

Bank, e.g. JPM Coin
‘Cash on Ledger’

US$, EUR, other
stable fiat currencies

Fractional reserve limits,
i.e. no external or central
bank collateral requirement
but offset 1:1 against bank
issued currency43

Central Bank,
e.g. PBOC

National currency

n/a, issued under national
monetary policy money
supply limits

Inherits risk of national currency

Consortium of
banks, e.g. Fnality

US$, CAD, GBP,
EUR, YEN

Cash reserve at central
banks (Fnality)

Partially that of bank but supported by
national currency because of cash reserve

Inherits risk of issuing bank (part of fractional
reserve by extension—holding same risks and
subject to same rules)

Non-bank Fintech
(fiat backed
stablecoins),
e.g. Tether

National currency

Cash reserve in
commercial bank

Inherits risk of the holding commercial bank;
however (as with Tether), requires
transparency to maintain confidence. It also
threatens financial stability as it carries the
traditional risks of private sector-mandated
stablecoins being ‘too big to fail’ and ‘too
connected to fail’. Furthermore, it carries
the risks of impacting countries’ monetary
policy transmission and may threaten the
effectiveness of the central bank’s functions
as a lender of last resort44

Non-bank Fintech
(collateral backed),
e.g. MakerDAO DAI

US$, EUR, other
stable currencies

Collateral reserve held as
digital assets

Managed by Fintech and governed by
Board, Foundation, etc.

US$ + YEN +
CHF + GBP + EUR...

Can include fiat currency
and bonds (i.e. Diem
originally proposed a mixture
of cash and bonds held in a
Swiss Commercial Bank)

Inherits risk of holding commercial bank BUT
not clear how currency valuation and
fluctuations would be managed

Non-bank Fintech
(fiat backed, multiple
currency) e.g. Diem

42

Underlying
currency

Haahr M, Foster K, Blakstad S, ‘Blockchain: Gateway for Sustainability Linked
Bonds (Green Digital Finance Alliance)’, HSBC Center of Sustainable Finance
and the Sustainable Digital Finance Alliance, 2019 <https://docs.wixstatic.com/
ugd/3d4f2c_a8d74cac6f974984a67f7b8c05146fbe.pdf>.
Because a bank-issued coin is backed by cash reserves held at the bank, it
carries the same risk as that bank’s deposits, unlike CBDCs which are backed
by central bank reserves. Theoretically, stablecoins have a 1-1 ratio in reserve;
however, this is also bank money and so part of the fractional reserve by
extension—they hold the same risks as the bank and are subject to the
same sector rules. The question as to whether it is bank-issued currency
(not backed by a central bank) is about what level of risk is applied.
Calhoun G, ‘Why China Stopped The Ant Group’s IPO (Part 2): Ant’s
Dangerous Business Model’, Forbes, November 2020, <www.forbes.com/
sites/georgecalhoun/2020/11/16/why-china-stopped-the-ant-groups-ipopart-2ants-dangerous-business-model/?sh=3a26725658bf>.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

9

Stablecoins
Stablecoins, such as Tether or DAI,45 are digital
currencies pegged to a ‘stable’ fiat currency, asset or
pool of assets.46 Bitcoin pioneered the paradigm of
a disintermediated peer-to-peer financial transaction
network, but because of its volatility, high transaction cost
and low throughput, it lacks the necessary characteristics
to be an efficient medium of exchange. As a result of an
in-built price stability mechanism, stablecoins, in general,
have comparative advantages over cryptocurrencies “in
terms of privacy, stability, decentralization and solvency”.47
As a store of value, stablecoins, like some physical assets
such as gold, may gain popularity among investors where
fiat currencies are unstable.48 Stablecoins may be favoured
as an underlying asset by a small niche of traders in
securities such as futures and options.49
While cryptocurrency is popular in some African countries
such as Kenya and Nigeria,50 adoption in LDCs has been
limited to date.51 In contrast, stablecoins derive leverage
from the fact that the coin is backed or collateralized by
a store of assets or currencies. Thus, depending on the
design and arrangement, stablecoins carry the potential
to facilitate secure and convenient transactions without
volatility, at a lower cost than telecom-issued mobile
money, and, depending on the currency design, held in
a wide variety of non-bank wallets. Stablecoins do not
share cryptocurrency characteristics such as volatility or
predetermined limits on supply.52 With the recent OCC
ruling that US banks can use stablecoins for payments53—
in a move that could be interpreted as opening up
45

46

47
48

49

50

FSB has a non-exhaustive list for stablecoins available cross-border, with
Tether being the leading one. Other stablecoins include DAO, DAI, TrueUSD,
USDPax, PAXGold, Everex, SGDR, 1SG, SDS, USDC, USDS, EURX, JPYX,
GBPX, AUDX, NZDX, CNYX, RUBX, CHFX, CADX, GLDX and SLVX; see
‘Addressing the Regulatory, Supervisory and Oversight Challenges Raised by
“Global Stablecoin” Arrangements’, The Financial Stability Board, April 2021,
<www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P140420-1.pdf>.
For a general discussion on the taxonomy of stablecoins, see Bullmann
D, Klemm J, Pinna A, ‘In Search for Stability in Crypto-Assets: Are Stablecoins the Solution?’, <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=3444847>.
Li C, Shen Y, ‘The Potential Impacts and Risks of Global Stablecoins’, China
Economic Journal, 2019 <http://doi.org/10.1080/17538963.2021.1872167>.
Reuters Staff, ‘Bitcoin emergence as ‘digital gold’ could lift price to 146000,
says JPM’, Reuters, January 2021, <www.reuters.com/article/crypto-currencies-jpm/bitcoin-emergence-as-digital-gold-could-lift-price-to-146000-says-jpmidUSL8N2JG2MM>.
Russell D, ‘Crypto Futures Are in Contango, Creating Potential Opportunities for Savvy Traders’, TradeStation, April 2021, <www.tradestation.com/
insights/2021/04/01/crypto-futures-contango-cash-carry/>.
See, for example, ‘The rise of crypto adoption in Africa’, International Finance,
May 2019, <https://internationalfinance.com/the-rise-of-crypto-adoption-in-

africa/>.
Nigerian Central Bank banned the use of cryptocurrency on 5 February 2021,
see Ogunrinoa I, ‘Banning Cryptocurrency Trade in Nigeria: Was the CBN
Right?’, Business Today, April 2021, <https://businessday.ng/opinion/article/
banning-cryptocurrency-trade-in-nigeria-was-the-cbn-right/#:~:text=On%20
February%205%202021%2C%20Nigeria%2C%20through%20its%20Central,perceived%20dangers%20to%20both%20end-users%20and%20the%20
country.>.
52 The reserve capability of the issuer is related to the amount of money that
goes into the system, so, in theory, could extend to the entire money supply
of a particular currency.
53 Sun M, ‘OCC Says Banks Can Use Stablecoins in Payments’, The Wall Street
Journal, January 2021, <https://www.wsj.com/articles/occ-says-banks-canuse-stablecoins-in-payments-11610068515>.

competition for the proposed Diem—their utility has
been extended. Therefore, stablecoins could serve as a
means of payment and store of value within and alongside
existing global payment systems, although for developed
countries, the benefits compared to existing payment
systems are limited, while they may carry consumer risks
such as poorly managed reserves.

Macroeconomic considerations
of stablecoins
Domestically, stablecoins, supported by improved
accessibility through tools such as mobile apps, can
support financial inclusion by enabling people to transact
and save digitally without the need for a formal bank
account, for example using Fintech wallets with lower
KYC requirements, similar to those applied today to
mobile money, but at a lower cost than telecom-issued
mobile money. As the poorest are very price-sensitive,
this is likely to increase the number of people using
electronic money for payments and savings. This in turn
would allow those currently underserved by financial
institutions to build digital histories, which can lead to
formalization of a business or access to credit.54 Used as a
means of payment or settlement cross-border, stablecoins
have the potential to overcome significant shortcomings
and friction in existing cross-border payments.55 This has
been trialled within financial institutions as a cost-saving
measure, for instance for interbank settlements, but
could also extend to reducing friction in cross-border retail
transactions, extending trading opportunities for small and
micro businesses in LDCs.
Nonetheless, stablecoins could also pose numerous
challenges and risks. In 2019, the Group of Seven
(G7) Working Group on Stablecoins investigated their
global impacts and concluded that such adverse effects
could be felt both nationally and internationally on
monetary sovereignty and financial stability.56 In addition,
stablecoins could also affect countries’ efforts to combat
money laundering, terrorist financing and tax avoidance.
Moreover, this emerging sector of financial innovation
is yet to be accepted as a payment means on a global
scale given that there has been significant fragmentation
in regulatory approaches towards stablecoins and
cryptocurrencies. For instance, while the OCC has
recently declared that federally chartered banks could
issue stablecoins for payments,57 the UK and EU are

51

54

55
56

57

Blakstad

S and Amars L, ‘Fintech at the Frontier: Technology developments
supporting financial inclusion in Niger’, Journal of Digital Banking 4(4), 2020,
<www.henrystewartpublications.com/jdb/v4>.
Arner D, Auer R, Frost J, ‘Stablecoins: risks, potential and regulation’, BIS
Working Paper No. 905, 2020, <www.bis.org/publ/work905.pdf>.
G7
 , International Monetary Fund [IMF], and The Committee on Payments
and Monetary Infrastructures [CPMI], ‘Investigating the impact of global
stablecoins’, IMF, 2020, <www.imf.org/~/media/Files/Research/G7SC-Report-on-Global-Stablecoins102019.ashx?la=en>.
Supra

note 20.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

10

still cautious in measuring the appropriate regulatory
approach. The HM Treasury put forth in its ‘Consultation
and call for evidence’ paper that such an approach should
be “proportionate” and “sensitive to risks posed, and
responsive to new developments in the market”.58
At the EU level, the proposed Markets in Crypto-assets
(MiCA) regulation aims to provide legal certainty for
cryptocurrency firms within the EU and beyond.59
In contrast, some developing economies where
cryptocurrencies have been popular as an alternative
store of wealth, or used to avoid taxation or AML controls
and, in many cases, exposed consumers to risk, have
responded with strict regulations for cryptocurrencies.
An example of such a ban is Nigeria, where the
Central Bank of Nigeria banned banks from holding
accounts which are used to trade in cryptocurrencies.60
Previously, Bangladesh imposed a ban on all types of
virtual currencies during the Bitcoin frenzy in 2017.61
Such bans have previously been implemented prior to a
country launching its own digital currency, for example in
Venezuela and then China. However, many LDCs are yet
to clearly define regulation of cryptocurrencies or other
digital assets. In the context of regulatory uncertainties
and fragmented opinions, there is a lack of uniform
standardized practice in regulating digital currencies,
including stablecoins. The most recent probe on Tether
and Bitfinex62 divulges that without a robust and strong
regulatory enforcement, stablecoins could be a means of
market manipulation hurting retail investors and causing
general distrust among consumers.
On a macroeconomic level, for LDCs, stablecoins
could substitute national currencies and trigger capital
flight which could lead to reduction in cash supply (in
local currencies) and thus change the basic monetary
structure in a sovereign country.63 A large-scale issuance
of stablecoins is likely to have an impact on the legal
tender of a country. In a small and open economy, US$backed stablecoins could enhance the dominant position
of the US$ and undermine the domestic currency.64
58

59

60

61

62

63

64

HM Treasury ‘UK Regulatory Approach to Cryptoassets and Stablecoins: Consultation and Call for Evidence’, January 2021, <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/950206/
HM_Treasury_Cryptoasset_and_Stablecoin_consultation.pdf>.
MiCA also seeks to harmonize national legislations, including Malta which is
known as ‘Blockchain Island’, and provide uniform rules for all cryptocurrency
markets.
BBC News, ‘Nigerian cryptocurrency: CBN ban Crypto [Dogecoin, Bitcoin,
Ethereum] trading in Nigeria, how Atiku, Davido, odas use ‘CowtoCurrency’
react’, February 2021, <www.bbc.com/pidgin/world-55961189>.
Mowla G, ‘Central Bank Issues Notice Banning Bitcoin in Bangladesh’,
Dhaka Tribune, December 2017, <www.dhakatribune.com/business/
banks/2017/12/27/bangladesh-bank-ban-bitcoin#:~:text=Bangladesh%20
Bank%20has%20banned%20the%20use%20of%20Bitcoin,,currency%20
in%20any%20other%20country%20in%20the%20world>.
Browne R, ‘Cryptocurrency firms Tether and Bitfinex agree to pay $18.5 million
to end New York probe’, CNBC, February 2021, <www.cnbc.com/2021/02/23/
tether-bitfinex-reach-settlement-with-new-york-attorney-general.html>.
‘Crypto-Asset Markets: Potential Channels for Future Financial Stability Implications’, Financial Stability Board, 2018, <www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/
P101018.pdf>. See also supra note 61.
Ibid.

Because of its faster circulation, GSC could “evolve into
a bridge between the US dollars and the local currency”
and thus “expedite the transformation of local legal
currency to the stablecoin”.65 This could potentially lead
to the gradual dollarization of small economies and
aggravate the devaluation of their domestic currencies.66
Furthermore, stablecoins use a novel technology and
governance structure67 that falls outside the scope of
traditional regulatory oversight and therefore may give
rise to new risks such as poorly managed reserves,
exposing customers to potential losses.68 If stablecoins
are adopted globally and grow to be systemically
significant, cross-border transactions in regions could be
possible without financial intermediaries and third-party
payment institutions which would raise holdings of GSCs
significantly.69 In the absence of effective regulations and
monetary policies, these risks will be amplified and could
potentially subvert the national monetary and financial
systems to the extent that it could widely substitute cash
and deposit in LDC economies, and eventually threaten
the safety, efficiency and integrity of the financial system.
Comprehensive regulation, supervision and oversight
mechanisms combined with domestic and international
cooperation will be needed to curb the adverse impacts
of GSCs.70

Global stablecoins (GSCs)
According to the Financial Stability Board (FSB) three
major characteristics distinguish GSCs from other
stablecoins and cryptocurrencies: (i) stabilization
mechanism; (ii) usable as a means of payment and/
or store of value (these two make them separate from
cryptocurrencies); and (iii) the potential to achieve
substantive volume across multiple jurisdictions (this
feature keeps a GSC separate from other stablecoins).71
Diem (formerly ‘Libra’) is an example of a GSC. Diem is
an independent “global, digitally native, reserve-backed
cryptocurrency” and subject to its own association.72
Originally proposed as ‘Libra’ by Facebook, Diem has
scaled back its ambitions of pegging the coin to a basket
of assets comprising currencies and bonds following
pushbacks by US regulators and is likely to offer only
US$-backed stablecoins. Facebook’s massive global reach
65
66
67

Ibid.,

p. 5.
Ibid.

As distributed ledgers and the systems built on them authorize and validate
transactions via distributed security and consensus protocols, there is no
financial institution to regulate.

68
69

Supra

note 68.
 VISA and other major payment networks are increasingly becoming
As
involved in transactions using stablecoins, distribution opportunities are
expanding exponentially, raising the potential for systemic significance. See
supra note 15.
For
 a discussion on GSCs’ regulatory, supervisory and oversight challenges
and G20 and FSB’s high-level recommendation in response to them, see supra
note 14.
‘Addressing

the Regulatory, Supervisory and Oversight Challenges Raised by
“Global Stablecoin” Arrangements’, FSB, April 2020, <www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P140420-1.pdf>.
‘Whitepaper

2.0’, Diem, April 2020, <www.diem.com/en-us/white-paper/>.

70

71

72

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

11

among billions of users through its social networks and
platforms could position Diem as a systemically important
GSC. With sufficient reach and utility to consumers, Diem
could pose an existential threat to countries’ monetary
systems as Diem’s confidence effect, convertibility and
easy exchangeability could potentially restrict the central
banks’ control on money supply. Even in its revised dollar
form, it presents a risk of currency substitution to less
stable currencies. However, currency substitution by
Diem or any other GSCs may depend on the degree of
adoption, monetary stability, including legal frameworks
and regulation.73

Macroeconomic considerations
of Diem: BFT’s adoption of a GSC
Diem, in its stablecoin form, presents several potential
risks specific to LDC currencies. These risks include a
flight from illiquid currencies to more stable ones such
as the euro or dollar. An easily accessible alternative
payment instrument and store of value, more stable than
local currencies and with utility across borders, could
be adopted as a substitute currency and once adopted,
used as a store of value. The likely high cost of exchange
to fiat could lead to further concentration.74 Although the
economic consequences of Diem or any GSC depend
on the degree of adoption,75 in smaller countries like the
Pacific Islands, Diem could eradicate national currencies
altogether. This existential threat, combined with a BFT’s
aggressive customer acquisition, proprietary e-wallet
and low barriers to entry—such as less rigorous KYC and
accessibility over a mobile phone—presents a scenario
of significant risk across Africa and in other developing
economies to lose currency sovereignty. Further, BFTs’
capitalization of network effects coupled with big
customer-base gives a conducive environment to gain
consumer confidence. Once consumers’ trust is achieved,
GSCs can de-link from fiat currencies and run as an
independent payment method.76 Because of the potential
for an easily accessible alternative payment instrument
and store of value, more stable than local currencies and
with utility across borders, to be adopted as a substitute
currency, the likely outcome would be widespread
adoption in countries with less stable currencies. It is
important to understand that, although potentially valuable
in enabling unbanked or underbanked people to save or
trade without the risks of cash, such alternative monetary
systems are able to exist because of a lack of globally
coordinated regulation, allowing corporations with large,
73

‘Digital Money Across Borders-- Macro Financial Implications’, International
Monetary Fund, September 2020, <www.imf.org/en/Publications/Policy-Papers/Issues/2020/10/17/Digital-Money-Across-Borders-Macro-Financial-Implications-49823>.
74 Blakstad S, ‘Libra: Economic Implications of Global Cryptocurrency’, The Alt
Coin Magazine, July 2019, <http://medium.com/the-capital/libra-economic-implications-of-global-cryptocurrency-8a5eef8bc9b7>.
75 Ibid.
76 Ibid.

internationally distributed financial resources to commit
regulatory arbitrage (intentionally or unintentionally), with
unintended consequences such as potentially destabilizing
national interests in pursuit of their corporate objectives.

Central bank digital
currencies (CBDCs)
CBDCs are a new form of digital central bank currency
distinguished from reserves or settlement balances held
by commercial banks at central banks.77 In response to
the rapid rise of digital payments in preference to cash
and the emergence of commercial GSCs, most central
banks are now researching or actively developing CBDCs
as an “alternative safe, robust, and convenient payment
instrument”.78 The BIS reports that 86 per cent of central
banks around the world are now undertaking extensive
research on CBDCs.79
Although large-scale CBDC adoption has not been
achieved, the Bahamas launched the first CBDC in
October 2020.80 The Eastern Caribbean Central Bank
(ECCB) went live with their pilot CBDC project, DCash,
in April 2021,81 which involved “secure minting of a
digital version of the Eastern Caribbean dollar as legal
tender”.82 Along with CBDC, central banks are also
considering digital versions of their local currencies—such
as China’s DC/EP and Cambodia’s Bakong. In Europe,
Sweden launched a year-long sovereign digital currency
project called ‘e-krona’. Moreover, the US has also been
contemplating establishing a CBDC infrastructure83 and
saw additional discussion and proposals in the wake of

77

78
79

80

81

82
83

Mancini-Griffoli

T, et al., ‘Casting Light on Central Bank Digital Currencies’, IMF
Staff Discussion Notes 18/08, 2018, <www.imf.org/en/Publications/Staff-Discussion-Notes/Issues/2018/11/13/Casting-Light-on-Central-Bank-Digital-Currencies-46233>.
‘Central Bank Digital Currencies’, BIS, March 2018, <www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/
d174.pdf>.
Boar

C, Wehrli A, ‘Ready, Steady, Go? -- Results of Third BIS Survey on Central
Bank Digital Currency’, BIS Papers No. 114, 2021, <www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/
bispap114.pdf>. In a previous survey before the pandemic, BIS reported that
80 per cent of central banks were conducting research on CBDC. See Boar
C, Holden H, Wadsworth A, ‘Impending Arrival - A Sequel to the Survey on
Central Bank Digital Currency’, BIS Papers No. 107, 2020, <www.bis.org/publ/
bppdf/bispap107.pdf>.
Bharathan

V, ‘Central Bank Digital Currency: The First Nationwide CBDCs
in the World has been Launched by the Bahamas’, Forbes, October 2020,
<www.forbes.com/sites/vipinbharathan/2020/10/21/central-bank-digital-currency-the-first-nationwide-CBDCs-in-the-world-has-been-launched-by-the-bahamas/?sh=d780b3506eb7>; Sekiguchi K, Onishi T, ‘Cambodia Debuts Digital
Currency as Emerging Countries Lead Charge’, The Nikkei Asia, October 2020
<http://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/Cryptocurrencies/Cambodia-debuts-digital-currency-as-emerging-countries-lead-charge>.
King

R, ‘ECCB Launches Lives CBDC Pilot’, Central Banking, April 2021,
<www.centralbanking.com/fintech/cbdc/7817766/eccb-launches-live-cbdc-pilot>.
‘ECCB

Digital EC Currency Pilot: What You Should Know’ Eastern Caribbean
Central Bank, <http://eccb-centralbank.org/p/what-you-should-know-1>.
Brett

J, ‘Federal Reserve Reveals Research Plans for Digital Dollar’, Forbes,
August 2020, <www.forbes.com/sites/jasonbrett/2020/08/13/federal-reserve-reveals-research-plans-for-digital-dollar/?sh=241f1bf25946>.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

12

the COVID-19 pandemic.84 Similarly, dozens of central
banks in emerging economies are considering issuing
CBDCs,85 while many international commercial banks
are already issuing internal ‘cash on ledger’ based on
blockchain to manage settlements and internal transfers.
Current international efforts regarding CBDC projects
revolve around CBDC’s designs, underlying technologies
and benefits. It is argued that CBDC has the potential of
creating “synergies with private payment solutions” and
contributing to an “innovative, competitive and resilient”
payment system across regions.86 It is likely to digitalize
the economy and achieve innovation across the payments
and monetary systems. It can create more efficient,
faster, and secure cross-border payments ensuring
smooth capital flow internationally. A large-scale adoption
of digital currencies by emerging market economies may
promote financial inclusion, especially for the unbanked
population.87 However, the success of CBDCs hinges
heavily on performance as a true alternative to cash
among users, including private consumers, financial
intermediaries and central banks. In other words, the core
success of CBDC depends on its functionality as a better
and more stable medium of exchange.

Another important aspect of CBDC is the type issued
(retail88 or wholesale89) and the associated design choices.
Designs of CBDCs and/or sovereign digital currencies
may vary in terms of access, technology, degree of
anonymity, operational availability and interest-bearing
characteristics.90 Design choices may depend on the
broader policy objective a central bank is likely to achieve
through adoption of CBDC. A domestic CBDC has the
potential to act as a central bank’s new monetary policy
tool and thus affect the central bank’s policy objectives.91
Different forms of CBDCs may have varying impacts on
payment systems, monetary policy transmissions as
well as the structure and stability of the financial system.
CBDC choice needs to be carefully weighed as CBDCs
could trigger macroeconomic shocks with their “effect
on portfolio choices of households and the probability of
bank runs”.92 Therefore, flexibility in designing a CBDC to
curb macroeconomic shock is paramount.93 It is possible
for CBDCs to be designed in a way to represent public–
private collaboration.94

88

89

90

84

85
86
87

See, for example, a number of bills introduced in both the US House and
Senate in March 2020, ‘US Democrat bill for Covid-19 plans digital dollar for
stimulus to unbanked’, Ledger Insights, March 2020, <www.ledgerinsights.
com/digital-dollar-us-democrat-bill-for-covid-19-central-bank-digital-currencycbdc/>.
Supra note 60.
‘Report on a Digital Euro’, European Central Bank, October 2020, p. 2, <www.
ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/Report_on_a_digital_euro~4d7268b458.en.pdf>.
Mancini-Griffoli T, et al., ‘Casting Light on Central Bank Digital Currency’, in C.
Brummer (Ed.), Cryptoasset: Legal, Regulatory, and Monetary Perspectives
(First ed., pp. 307–339). The United States: Oxford University Press; 2019.

91

92
93
94

 lso known as ‘general purpose’ CBDC, a retail CBDC will be issued for
A
the general consumers. For a critical analysis on retail CBDC and its design
choices, see Auer R, Bohme R, ‘The Technology of Retail Central Bank Digital
Currency’, BIS Quarterly Review, March 2020, <www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt2003j.pdf>.
A wholesale CBDC is for financial institutions holding reserve deposits with a
central bank. A wholesale CBDC could be exclusively for interbank payments,
see supra note 79 and also infra note 93.
Agur I, Ari A, Dell’Ariccia G, ‘Designing Central Bank Digital Currencies’,
IMF Working Paper WP/19/252, 2019, <www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/
Issues/2019/11/18/Designing-Central-Bank-Digital-Currencies-48739>. See also
Auer R, Cornelli G, Frost J, ‘Rise of the central bank digital currencies: drivers,
approaches and technologies’, BIS Working Papers, no. 880, 2020, <www.bis.
org/publ/work880.htm>.
Although in practice, no central bank has yet expressed an intention to do
so. See Francesca Carapella F, Flemming J, ‘Central Bank Digital Currency:
A Literature Review’, FEDS Notes, November 2020, <www.federalreserve.
gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/central-bank-digital-currency-a-literature-review-20201109.htm>.
Ibid.
Ibid.
For
 further analysis see Allen S, et al., ‘Design choices for Central Bank Digital
Currency: Policy and technical considerations’, Brookings Institute, 2020,
<www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Design-Choices-for-CBDC_Final-for-web.pdf>.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

13

Box 1: Design choices of CBDC
CBDC could be either retail issued to the public for retail payments or wholesale issued to financial institutions for exclusively
interbank settlement purposes.95 Within retail and wholesale CBDCs, there are several design choices available as per the
existing CBDC literature.96
1.1. In terms of CBDC’s ability to provide anonymity, it could be divided between account-based and token-based. In an
account-based CBDC, funds are transferred from account to account,97 whereas in a token-based CBDC the transfer occurs
via wallets. For an account-based CBDC, the central bank maintains a central ledger for settlement, while settlement in a
token-based CBDC could be either centralized or decentralized. For both CBDCs, central banks could verify the users’
identities. Therefore, it is unlikely that CBDC would be fully anonymous like cash, yet some degree of pseudonymity is
achievable through token-based CBDCs.
1.2. In terms of access and legal claim, a retail CBDC could be direct, indirect or hybrid.98

Direct CBDC
• CBDC is a direct claim on central banks
• Central Banks handle payments directly

Hybrid CBDC99
• CBDC is a direct claim on central banks
• C
 entral banks handle retail balances
periodically

Indirect CBDC
• A CBDC claim belongs to an intermediary
• Intermediaries handle retail payments
and central banks deal with wholesale
payments

1.3. Although, to date, none of the central banks are considering interest-bearing CBDC, theoretically, CBDC can

be interest-bearing (with attributes similar to deposits) or non-interest-bearing (similar to cash).100 While an
interest-bearing CBDC could trigger bank disintermediation, it could alleviate the macroeconomic shocks arising
from the disappearance of cash.101
A CBDC can carry a wide range of macroeconomic
impacts, depending on the design and technology used,
CBDC’s characteristics (cash-like and interest-bearing) and
the size of the economy. Several studies have considered
the macroeconomic implications and financial stability
issues raised by the possible introduction of CBDC.102
These studies used a more or less closed-economy as the
context in which trade and capital flows are restricted.103

95


Adrian
T, Mancini-Griffoli T, ‘The rise of digital money’, IMF Note, no 19/001,
July 2019; Kumhof M, Noone C, ‘Central bank digital currencies – design
principles and balance sheet implications’, Bank of England Working Papers,
no 725, 2018, Mancini-Griffoli T, et al., ‘Casting light on central bank digital
currencies’, International Monetary Fund, November 2018.
96 Ibid.
97 This is more like today’s commercial banks’ transactions between depositors.
98
99

See supra note 91.

Also
known as ‘synthetic CBDC’; for a general discussion on ‘synthetic CBDC’,
see supra note 99.

100 See

supra note 93.
101 Ibid.
102 Ibid. See also, Barrdear J, Kumhof M, ‘The Macroeconomics of Central Bank
Issued Digital Currencies’, Bank of England Working Paper No. 605, 2016,
<www.bankofengland.co.uk/working-paper/2016/the-macroeconomics-of-central-bank-issued-digital-currencies>; Andolfatto D, ‘Assessing the Impact of
Central Bank Digital Currency on Private Banks’, Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis, 2018, <www.sfu.ca/~dandolfa/CBDC.pdf>; Brunnermeier MK, Niepelt
D, ‘On the equivalence of private and public money’, Journal of Monetary
Economics 106(27), 2019, <www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
S0304393219301229>; Chiu J, Al Hosseini MD, Jiang J, ‘Bank Market Power
and Central Bank Digital Currency: Theory and Quantitative Assessment’
Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper (2010-20), 2019 <www.econ.ntu.edu.
tw/uploads/asset/data/5ef0594348b8a1027b00180e/HKBU_1090703.pdf>;
Fernandez-Villaverde J, et al., ‘Central Bank Digital Currency: Central Banking
For All?’, NBER Working Paper Series No. 26753, 2020, <www.sas.upenn.
edu/~jesusfv/Central_Banking_All.pdf>.
103 Minesso Ferrari M, Mehl A, Stracca L, ‘The International Dimension of a Central Bank Digital Currency’, Vox EU, October 2020, <https://voxeu.org/article/
international-dimension-central-bank-digital-currency>.

The macroeconomic and social welfare implications
were also studied using a CBDC model with adjustable
interest rate in a small but open economy context with
trade and capital flows.104 This showed that an interestbearing CBDC “could be a versatile instrument that
would, in theory, improve monetary policy by allowing
non-linear transfers and more direct implementation and
transmission”.105 Economists also explored the potential
of offering a negative interest rate on CBDCs and argued
that “paying a negative interest rate on CBDC can cause
a decrease in capital investment and GDP”.106 However,
understanding the full macroeconomic implications of a
CBDC at this exploratory stage is beyond the scope of
this paper. Hence, based on the current literature, publicly
available information and resources, this paper forwards
some general macroeconomic considerations of CBDC
keeping LDC economies in the focus. It is our observation
that each of these macroeconomic considerations
requires a full in-depth analysis and could vary depending
on CBDC’s design, technology used and the size of the
economy in which it is issued.

104

105

106

G
 eorge A, Xie T, Alba JD, ‘Central Bank Digital Currency with Adjustable
Interest Rate in Small Open Economies’, SSRN, 2020, <https://papers.ssrn.
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3605918>.
Al Hosseini MD, Rivadeneyra F, Zhu Y, ‘Central Bank Digital Currency and
Monetary Policy’, Bank of Canada, February 2020, <www.bankofcanada.
ca/2020/02/staff-analytical-note-2020-4/>.
J ia P, ‘Negative Interest Rates on Central Bank Digital Currency’, MPRA Paper
No. 103828, 2020, <https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/103828/1/MPRA_paper_103828.pdf>.
14

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

Macroeconomic considerations
of CBDCs
Given the decentralized nature of DLT, a CBDC issued
on DLT could lead to a reduced role for traditional
players such as commercial banks and other financial
intermediaries and may lead to a decrease in their
lending.107 This is more likely in LDCs with limited financial
infrastructure, which could choose to rely on non-bank
distribution opportunities offered by Fintechs to achieve
penetration to largely unbanked populations, leading to
credible alternatives to traditional banks for those who do
have access to financial services. While most jurisdictions
will opt for a centralized or hybrid architecture giving banks
and even non-banks a key role in the distribution of money
and opening of accounts, in the case of LDCs with limited
financial infrastructure, banks’ role as custodians of store
of value and payments intermediaries could diminish in
favour of Fintechs, impacting their potential to implement
monetary policy. Unlike developed economies in which
the financial institutions are mature, a large movement
of bank deposits to domestically issued CBDCs held by
private individuals, businesses or non-bank custodians
in LDCs (where there is low trust in institutions), could
reduce banks’ liquidity, impacting their ability to offer credit,
which could be offset by limits to transaction sizes or
account sizes, as currently applied to non-bank deposits in
many countries. Conversely, CBDCs used as a wholesale
settlement instrument would reduce settlement times
and the amount of value locked up in gross settlements.108
Economists and policymakers will need to respond to these
impacts on money supply when designing monetary policy.
Emerging market economies are especially advanced
in experimenting with the possibility of issuing CBDCs.
These economies are motivated to test CBDCs, given the
opportunities presented for financial inclusion, financial
stability, domestic payments efficiency, reduced monopoly
of private payments systems, payments safety and
because they fear that cross-border payment alternatives,
such as Diem and foreign-issued CBDCs, could displace
their own currencies. An IMF study shows that if CBDCs
issued by stable economies are not well-designed,
they could cause or accelerate ‘currency substitution’ in
emerging markets and developing economies, particularly
in countries with weaker macroeconomic policies, which
are unable to control cash-based currency substitution
through regulation and may face the same or greater
challenges with those currencies in digital form.109

107

108
109


Disintermediation
can be avoided if banks still have access to reserve that
will facilitate their lending businesses. For reference, see supra note 93
citing Andolfatto D, ‘Assessing the Impact of Central Bank Digital Currency on
Private Banks’, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper (2018-25),
2018, <www.sfu.ca/~dandolfa/CBDC.pdf>.
Supra note 14.
Supra note 78.

Furthermore, the availability of CBDCs associated with
large economies, such as China, lays the ground for a
potential flight to the currency from illiquid currencies and
speculation on the open market (mirroring the concerns
regarding Diem). While China has introduced control
mechanisms to maintain stability, there was significant
interest from investors in the DC/EP when it was first
announced, bolstered by the idea that a widely available,
accessible digital currency has potential to replace the
US$ as the world’s de facto reserve currency.110 The
impact on less stable economies of a significant flight
to alternative currencies would be to reduce the ability
of governments to collect tax and to maintain control
of their fiscal or monetary policy. It can be argued
that in some LDCs with very high inflation, currency
substitution could actually stabilize the economy to the
benefit of people and SMEs, as has recently been seen
in Venezuela,111 which has also seen higher demand for
cryptocurrencies alongside US$.112 However, the benefits
may be difficult to achieve if a CBDC is tied to foreign
reserves.113 A CBDC pegged to foreign currency could also
“[increase] asymmetries in the international monetary
system by reducing monetary policy autonomy in foreign
economies”.114 For instance, if a foreign government’s
CBDC is available in developing economies that have
better control of monetary policy, but higher inflation, it is
likely that the foreign government’s CBDC could gradually
substitute the local currency and thus can have a negative
impact. In short, the LDCs’ central banks would lose
control of money supply as a result of gradual currency
substitution, impacting sustainable development of that
country.115
Although it is debatable whether China’s DC/EP will have
the characteristics likely to offer first mover advantages,
such as increased use as a reserve currency or in
international trade, over other nations as a result of its
digital nature alone,116 its effort to internationalize RMB
110 The

Yuan is currently the third reserve currency behind the US$ and EUR,
and some speculate that it could become more dominant both through investment and through currency substitution. See Birch DGW, ‘The Currency Cold
War: Cash and Cryptography, Hash Rates and Hegemony’, London Publishing
Partnership, 2020; John A, ‘Explainer: How does China’s digital yuan work?’,
Reuters, October 2020, <www.reuters.com/article/us-china-currency-digital-explainer-idUSKBN27411T>.
111 ‘Venezuela

Economic Outlook’, Focus Economics, November 2020, <www.
focus-economics.com/countries/venezuela>.
112 Helmes

K, ‘Venezuela’s Bitcoin Use Soars Amid Hyperinflation: 3rd on Global
Crypto Adoption Index’, Bitcoin.com, August 2020, <https://news.bitcoin.
com/venezuela-bitcoin-use-hyperinflation-crypto-adoption/>.
113 Iancu

A, et al. ‘Reserve Currencies in an Evolving International Monetary
System’, IMF, November 2020, <www.imf.org/en/Publications/Departmental-Papers-Policy-Papers/Issues/2020/11/17/Reserve-Currencies-in-an-Evolving-International-Monetary-System-49864>.
114 Supra

note 108.
115 See

‘Selected sustainable development trends in the least developed
countries – 2019’, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), 2019, <http://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/aldc2019d1_en.pdf>.
116 While accessibility gives the first CBDC issued by a major economy a headstart in retail and potentially trade, its potential to replace US$ as a global
reserve currency is dependent on additional factors such as existing global
reserves: Carsten A, ‘Central bank digital currencies: putting a big idea into
practice’, Bank for International Settlements, March 2021, <www.bis.org/
speeches/sp210331.pdf>.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

15

and decrease dependence on the dollar-dominated
financial system is taking on real shape as China is
working closely with regional financial hubs to establish
a platform where DC/EP is interoperable with other
countries.117 CBDC’s interoperability and cross-border
operability with other jurisdictions could also give rise to
multifaceted macroeconomic impacts in LDCs, although
such features have certain advantages in establishing
an efficient, cheaper and faster international payment
system.118

Table 2: Countries in which retail CBDC/digital currencies have launched,
or are being piloted or researched

The Bahamas (Sand Dollar)

Launched

Pilot stage

Research

Cambodia (Bakong)
Eastern Caribbean (DCash) (comprising St Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saint Lucia, Grenada, Dominica, Caribbean, Antigua and Barbuda)
China

Singapore

Ecuador

Sweden

Jamaica

Turkey

Japan

Ukraine

Republic of Korea

Uruguay

Australia

Kenya

Bahrain

Madagascar

Brazil

Mauritius

Brunei

Morocco

Canada

New Zealand

Czechia

Norway

Eurozone

South Africa

Finland

Suriname

Ghana

Thailand

Iceland

Tunisia

India

United Kingdom

Indonesia

USA

Source: Bank of International Settlements 2021119

117

118

119


Inthanon-LionRock
is a CBDC project for cross-border payments by the Hong
Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) and the Bank of Thailand (BoT). Recently,
the Inthanon-LionRock project has been extended to include China’s Digital
Currency Institute and the UAE. The joint initiative is supported by the BIS
and renamed as ‘mCBDC Bridge’. For reference, see supra note 19.
For a general analysis on the cross-border aspects of CBDCs, see Auer R,
Haene P, Holden H, ‘Multi-CBDC Arrangements and the Future of Cross-Border Payments’, Bank for International Settlements, March 2020, <https://
www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap115.pdf>.
Auer R, Cornelli G, Frost J, ‘Rise of the central bank digital currencies: drivers,
approaches and technologies’, Bank of International Settlements Working
Paper No. 880, August 2020, <www.bis.org/publ/work880.htm>.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

16

Graph 2: Interactive map of CBDC status (updated to 7 April 2021)

Source: Raphael Auer, Giulio Cornelli and Jon Frost, Rise of the central bank digital currencies: drivers, approaches and technologies.
BIS Working Papers No 880. 24 August 2020. https://www.bis.org/publ/work880.htm

National Bank of Cambodia’s
Project Bakong
With a view to simplifying and expediting access to
financial services for its citizens, the Central Bank of
Cambodia recently launched ‘Project Bakong’—leaning
on a mixture of more established financial services and
more novel CBDC approaches. The recently launched
project allows users to transact in Cambodian Riel or US$
and features DLT to help record transactions in a way
that lowers compliance burdens for financial institutions.
To date, 18 of the country’s 43 commercial banks have
signed up to be able to process Project Bakong payments,
facilitated by Hyperledger Iroha120 and its ability to connect
with ease to legacy systems.121

Hub and spoke model
in China: DC/EP
China’s DC/EP has been extensively tested and is
undergoing extensive piloting with plans for launch
in 2022. Because China already has a mature digital
payments infrastructure, with 95 per cent of payments
going through digital wallets, the Central Bank of China is
using BFTs, WeChatPay and AliPay, and the state-owned
commercial banking system (Bank of China (BOC), the
China Construction Bank (CCB), the Agricultural Bank of
China (ABC) and the Industrial and Commercial Bank of
China (ICBC)), to distribute its CBDC through digital

120
121

 reference, see Hyperledger Iroha <www.hyperledger.org/use/iroha>.
For
See Project Bankong <https://bakong.nbc.org.kh>.

wallets (CGTN 2020).122 Although the digital cash will
be tracked on databases held in the various institutions,
mimicking a blockchain node structure, the currency
will not initially use blockchain technology, somewhat
protecting Chinese commercial banks while reducing
potential settlement benefits.

Riksbank’s e-krona
The growing disappearance of cash prompted Sweden’s
central bank to launch a pilot project, e-krona, a CBDC
with attributes similar to Swedish krona.123 Although it can
be designed in various ways—either in physical form (such
as banknotes and coins) or electronic (such as money in
bank accounts)—currently the Riksbank is testing e-krona
in a token form, “a uniquely identifiable digital unit of
value” similar to the value of a Swedish krona.124
Under the distribution model of e-krona (similar to
the current model for cash) developed on blockchain
technology, transactions are made through nodes run by
the Riksbank and other participants, such as payment
service providers.125 e-krona requires the user to have a
debiting account in the Riksbank’s settlement system—
RIX. KYC obligation lies with the participants in distribution
of e-krona.126
122

124

‘China

to Begin Pilot Run of Digital Currency Electronic Payment’, CGTN,
August 2020, <https://news.cgtn.com/news/2020-08-14/China-to-begin-pilot-run-of-Digital-Currency-Electronic-Payment-SWz6W63E1q/index.html>.
Fulton

C, ‘Sweden Starts Testing World’s First Central Bank Digital Currency’,
Reuters, February 2020, <www.reuters.com/article/us-cenbank-digital-sweden-idUSKBN20E26G>.
‘E-krona Pilot Phase 1’, Sveriges Riksbank, April 2021, p. 5 <www.riksbank.

125
126

se/globalassets/media/rapporter/e-krona/2021/e-krona-pilot-phase-1.pdf>.
Ibid.

Ibid.


123

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

17

Graph 3: How e-krona is distributed127
THE RIKSBANK'S NODE
The Riksbank creates and
destroys e-kronor that are
represented by tokens.
THE E-KRONA
NETWORK

Withdrawal/
deposit
Transfer

NOTARY NODE
A technical function operated by the Riksbank. It
checks that a token has
not been used before.

END-USERS
Deposits/withdrawals are
made with the aid of digital
wallets, connected to e.g. a
mobile app or a card.
THE PARTICIPANTS’ NODES
The participants, for instance, banks
and payment service providers, operate their own nodes and check the authenticity of the tokens.

Source: ‘E-krona Pilot Phase 1’, Sveriges Riksbank, April 2021, p. 5
<www.riksbank.se/globalassets/media/rapporter/e-krona/2021/e-krona-pilot-phase-1.pdf>.

7

CBDCs versus stablecoins
A key difference between CBDCs and their fiat equivalent
is the accessibility of that currency both to national
residents and potentially to non-residents (unless the
decision is taken to issue solely for domestic use). If
granted access, residents in high-inflation countries
may turn to CBDCs issued by a low-inflation country
(as they do nowadays with cash).128 Like CBDCs,
commercially issued stablecoins, which share many
characteristics with CBDCs, could present an alternative
or—for the unbanked—a primary store of value for
their assets. Similarly, central banks could partner with
e-money providers to issue ‘synthetic CBDCs’ which
provide a desired stability of e-money and stablecoins
from market, liquidity and foreign exchange risks.129

From a monetary policy transmission perspective,
this public–private entanglement means that in the
absence of strong capital control by central banks
and enforceable regulations against holding foreign
CBDC, emerging economies may face the risks of
currency substitution as the BFTs may prefer a mode
of currency preferable to them, such as US$. Privately
issued stablecoins used as a store of value, backed
by commercial bank fiat or other assets, present an
asymmetry to CBDCs backed by central bank reserves.
This could reduce bank retail deposits in favour of
protected accounts130 and consequently reduce
the central bank’s ability to implement monetary
policy via the commercial banking system.

127

Ibid, p. 7.

130

128

Supra note 126.

129

Supra note 79.

Under

Basel III, escrowed deposits have lower fractional reserve allowances.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

18

In light of these emerging macroeconomic challenges,
it is likely that many governments and central banks will
need to rethink fiscal and monetary policies. Some weak
economies, dependent on foreign investment and aid for
infrastructure development, may already have lost much
of their fiscal control; however, this challenge will be
amplified and likely spread to additional countries, even
as the benefits of digitization are delivered.

Combined macroeconomic
impacts of CBDCs and digital
currencies on LDCs
The traceability of digital money could build confidence
to reignite foreign direct investment (FDI) and offer
opportunities for sustainability-linked investment such as
green and impact bonds, to encourage greater cashflow
into LDC economies.131 Most LDCs132 are likely to be
behind other countries in issuing domestic CBDCs as
governments lack the resources to focus on development,
leaving them vulnerable to an influx of foreign-issued
CBDCs and commercial GSCs, which may increase
dollarization of countries with weak monetary control, but
could improve financial resilience for the poor, by offering
a stable store of value.133 Domestic CBDCs, like GSCs or
foreign CBDCs, could also accelerate financial inclusion
in excluded populations by giving people access to stores
of central bank currency in a wallet issued by a Fintech,
without the need for a bank account, so that the very
poorest are able to avoid the high costs charged by banks
and mobile money providers. However, this will depend
on central banks either lowering KYC restrictions in an
account-based system, or choosing to issue their currency
as a truly cash-like CBDC with no KYC restrictions, such
as in a token-based system.134 This will be one of the
key decisions that central banks need to make between
control and utility.
Unlike China, in most countries the central bank and
government-owned banking institutions are dwarfed by
the commercial sector, thus the state’s ability to control
and maintain low pricing on bank-issued wallets would
be lower. LDCs generally have limited formal financial
infrastructure, with the majority of people outside the
131
132

133

134

Supra note 43.

With
exceptions, for example, Cambodia: ‘Cambodia launches national blockchain payment system Bakong’, Ledger Insights, December 2020, <www.
ledgerinsights.com/cambodia-national-blockchain-payment-system-bakong-cbdc/>.
Mobile penetration in LDCs is relatively low, while other adoption barriers
such as low literacy and device ownership are likely to prevent rapid adoption
of GSCs in the short term. However, as mobile penetration increases (to
50% in 2025 for sub-Saharan Africa, according to GSMA <www.gsma.com/
mobileeconomy/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/GSMA_MobileEconomy2020_
SSA_Eng.pdf>) and Fintech solutions enabling wallets to be held without a
smartphone emerge, adoption is likely to grow.
While issuing institutions will have KYC restrictions, there is no KYC on
peer-to-peer transactions and a token-based versus account-based structure
is still very much up for debate. See, for example, <https://www.bis.org/publ/
qtrpdf/r_qt2003j.htm>.

financial system and more likely to turn to private Fintechs
than banks. Furthermore, digital financial inclusion is
dependent on access, via technology. Adoption rates for
mobile, while rapidly rising, are still low in rural areas and
for traditionally excluded demographics such as women,
refugees and disabled people. BFT’s business models
would allow them to benefit these last mile populations
through alternative channels such as community-focused
mobile solutions, which allow account access to those
without devices. However, they may lack motivation
to reach these last mile demographics because of
the greater income potential from wealthier (urban)
customers.
The introduction of digital substitute currencies, including
CBDCs and GSCs, could benefit LDCs as they have
the potential of making cross-border payments faster,
reducing trade barriers and stabilizing savings for people
in LDCs. Nonetheless, this may also mean that the
LDC governments’ abilities to benefit from local entities
through taxation could, rather than improving through
greater visibility, be curtailed because of a lack of visibility
for substitute currency transactions. It could further
minimize regulators’ ability to control consumers’ choice
of currency for savings and stores of value, which could
potentially affect their ability to implement monetary
policy. As noted previously, while in some LDCs with very
high inflation this could stabilize the economy, benefiting
the population and SMEs, in less volatile economies this
could have a negative impact on development.

Digital currencies in the
African context
Africa is home to most of the world’s LDCs,135 which are
also facing the hardest economic impact from COVID-19.
The COVID-19 pandemic is responsible for reducing
previously forecasted 2020 growth from nearly 4 per
cent to between −1.7 per cent and −3.4 per cent.136
As the population growth rate across the continent
is 2.7 per cent annually, many businesses, especially
from China and the US, are recognizing the continent’s
huge market potential and have started to both invest
in and distribute goods and services there, including
technology and infrastructure, enabling wider adoption of
mobile devices thanks to cheap imports and improving
networks. Some BFTs such as M-Pesa are home-grown
African businesses, although more are now moving into
Africa from elsewhere through acquisition or horizontal
expansion from other service offerings.

135

‘Map of least developed countries’, UNCTAD, <https://unctad.org/topic/vul-

136

nerable-economies/least-developed-countries/map>.
‘African

Economic Outlook 2020’, African Development Bank <https://www.
afdb.org/en/news-keywords/african-economic-outlook-2020>.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

19

Facebook’s Free Basics rollout has reached hundreds of
millions of customers, giving people access to free data to
view a curated range of websites, despite being banned
in India because of concerns about data harvesting and
‘fake news’. Ant Group is targeting Africa’s areas with low
levels of financial infrastructure, as the service offerings
do not require physical or server infrastructure (i.e. no
need for one centralized data centre but rather on cloud
or DLT).137 While its recent IPO attempt was blocked by
regulators, Ant’s expansion seems inevitable. At a macro
level, both of these organizations have the scale and reach
to potentially weaken local financial institutions, even
unintentionally, through the introduction of accessible
substitute currencies and to materially compromise
central banks’ abilities to control monetary policy.
Although platforms like Facebook Free Basics do not yet
offer wide-scale financial services, with the advancement
of Facebook’s digital wallet and the maturation of the
Diem stablecoin, this is unlikely to be far off. This is a key
example of a BFT’s ability to use an existing platform as
a key enabler and vehicle through which to reach large,
underserved populations—in many cases circumventing
national financial services providers. Privately issued
stablecoins are increasingly being adopted through various
Fintech platforms, further encouraging central banks to
move into this space because of the “mushrooming of
private cryptocurrencies”.138
Some technically savvy Africans have embraced
cryptocurrencies: consumers in Kenya, Nigeria and
South Africa are all in the top 10 users of cryptocurrency
globally139 according to Chainalysis, although these
countries are not necessarily representative of subSaharan Africa or LDCs as a whole. In addition, Senegal
launched a digital version of the West African Franc
in 2016, although it failed to gain traction with other
West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU)
countries and lost the support of Senegal’s Central
Bank. However, other West African countries have digital
currencies planned and Senegal is trying again with Akoin,
a commercially issued stablecoin.140

Potential evolution of an
African bloc currency
Beyond the current landscape of digital currencies, Africa
is developing a distinct trend to use digital currency
as a means to promote regional trade and economic
integration among countries within the region.141 African
countries have been working towards a continental free
trade agreement (African Continental Free Trade Area or
AfCFTA142) to encourage cross-border trade facilitated
by several regional organizations, such as the South
African Development Community (SADC), the East
African Community (EAC), the West African Economic
and Monetary Union (WAEMU), Central African Economic
and Monetary Community (CEMAC) and Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). There
is also a region-specific trend towards establishing a
common monetary zone with a common currency under
a common central bank. Fourteen African countries
currently use bloc currencies—the Central African Franc
and the West African Franc.
With the proliferation of digital currencies, especially
projects undertaken by sovereigns and regions like the
EU, there have been similar attempts to create both an
Anglophone West African bloc currency by ECOWAS (to
be known as ‘Eco’)143 and an East African144 bloc currency
by EAC. Unlike the Euro, these bloc currency zones
are a “legacy of colonialism”; however, this legacy also
provides a template for currency blocs.145 Overall, this
provides a foundation for the potential emergence of bloc
cryptocurrencies across Africa, likely starting with existing
bloc currencies. The move from paper to national bankbacked digital currencies could provide significant crossborder trade opportunities, particularly for Francophone
West African countries, in which telco mobile money has,
to date, had lower penetration than in Anglophone East
Africa.146

141

142

137 Tudor-Ackroyd

A ‘Where will Ant Group’s Next Billion Users Come from as it
Ploughs its Jumbo IPO Proceeds into Overseas Expansion?’, The South China
Morning Post, October 2020, <www.scmp.com/business/banking-finance/
article/3105634/where-will-ant-groups-next-billion-users-come-it-ploughs>.
138 See Huillet M, ‘Kenya’s central bank exploring CBDCs due to ‘mushrooming’
of private cryptos’ Cointelegraph, October 2020, <https://cointelegraph.com/
news/kenya-s-central-bank-exploring-cbdcs-due-to-mushrooming-of-privatecryptos>.
139 Stephon C, ‘Revealed: The countries with the highest levels of everyday crypto use’, Modern Consensus, September 2020, <https://modernconsensus.
com/cryptocurrencies/bitcoin/revealed-the-countries-with-the-highest-levelsof-everyday-crypto-use/>.
140 Rahul N, Baird K, ‘How Digital Currency Could Change Senegal’s Financial
System Forever’, be in crypto, July 2020 <http://beincrypto.com/how-digital-currency-could-change-senegals-financial-system-forever/>.

143

144

145

146

See,

for example, ‘How online payments can deepen regional trade’, Business Daily, September 2020 <www.businessdailyafrica.com/corporate/tech/
How-online-payments-can-deepen-regional-trade/4258474-5618318-u9gfngz/
index.html>.
Mukeredzi

T, ‘Africa’s free trade agreement hinges on commitment and
implementation’, Africa Renewal, <www.un.org/africarenewal/news/africa%E2%80%99s-free-trade-agreement-hinges-commitment-and-implementation>.
For
 regional efforts in Africa, see Uche Ordu A ‘An Evaluation of the Single
Currency Agenda in the ECOWAS Region’, Brookings, September 2019
<www.brookings.edu/blog/africa-in-focus/2019/09/24/an-evaluation-of-the-single-currency-agenda-in-the-ecowas-region/>.
See

The East African Monetary Union [EAMU] <www.eac.int/monetary-union>. See also, KNA ‘Common East African Currency To Be In Use
Soon’, Kenya News Agency, August 2019, <www.kenyanews.go.ke/commoneast-african-currency-to-be-in-use-soon/>.
See,

for example, Maclean R ‘West African Countries Take a Step Away
From Colonial-Era Currency’, The New York Times, December 2019, <www.
nytimes.com/2019/12/21/world/africa/west-africa-currency-france-franc.html>.
See

‘State of the Industry Report on Mobile Money’, GSMA, 2019, <www.
gsma.com/sotir/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/GSMA-State-of-the-Industry-Report-on-Mobile-Money-2019-Full-Report.pdf>.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

20

Unbanked communities:
the frontline for maintaining
currency sovereignty
Digital currencies are likely to have a proportionally greater
impact on the unbanked in LDCs and other countries
with larger unbanked populations, with macroeconomic
consequences if rolled out on a large scale. With some
exceptions, as previously noted, LDCs, with weak financial
infrastructure, are also likely to introduce domestic
CBDCs later than richer countries, based on the state
of known research, which, to date, is very low in LDCs.
This, together with weak financial systems, leaves them
uniquely vulnerable to widespread adoption by unbanked
people of non-native CBDCs or commercially issued
stablecoins. Where Fintechs choose to issue stablecoins
in domestic currencies, they have the potential to partially
act as a proxy for a CBDC by preventing encroachment
of foreign CBDCs and maintaining national currency
sovereignty, although they would not fulfil other functions
of CBDCs, such as implementing monetary policy. Given
the scale of this community population in LDCs, the
choice between allowing privately issued stablecoins or
allowing foreign-issued currencies to encroach, is likely to
have systemic impact for currency substitution.
We have witnessed that digitalization has already enabled
millions of people to access digital money without
needing a bank account through the introduction and
development of telco-issued mobile money since 2007.
This access has had broadly positive impacts such as
greater financial inclusion, a reduction in the gender gap
for access to financial services and the ability to purchase
via PAYG clean energy and other utilities.147 However,
negative impacts have also been observed, such as
crowding out existing microenterprises because in the
poorest economies demand for the goods and services
being offered does not grow to meet supply. This was
observed by Bateman et al.148 in their study of the impact
of M-Pesa on Kenya’s microbusinesses, where access
to credit enabled people to establish microbusinesses,
increasing competition in a saturated market, ultimately
leading to failures and defaults.149
BFTs and other Fintechs do, however, have the potential
to support market-based interventions to increase both
demand and supply, by going beyond provision of basic
products like payments and lending, to include services

such as blended financing for agricultural inputs (as
M-Pesa has done in Kenya150), increasing transparency in
supply chains and lenders’ terms. They have the potential
to open up investment corridors to communities such
as agricultural cooperatives, and to improve efficiency in
export production, bringing much-needed foreign capital
into LDCs.151
BFTs and other Fintechs can also play an important role
in the formalization and commercialization of unbanked
savings and lending groups, which typically form
where communities lack access to formal finance, and
membership is disproportionately female. Community
groups like these provide an important social safety net
for their members, and typically have a low default rate, as
the members are encouraged to borrow realistically and
to repay based on strong social bonds.152 Formalization of
these groups, by giving them access to identity, finance
and markets, can be the first step in creating better
market economies, enabling community members to find
new markets, such as urban or international markets, for
products which may not find a market locally. Because
these communities typically have low levels of literacy and
poor access to both mobile devices and signal, the design,
technology requirements and digital literacy required to
use BFT products may exclude these groups, missing a
significant development opportunity.

Global considerations: shadow
banking and COVID-19
While many BFTs include a broad range of consumers
into their financial services, promoting financial inclusion
for the unbanked and underbanked, Fintech credits could
be more costly than traditional credit services. This is
partly because of taxes on mobile money transactions
in many countries.153 In addition, although BFTs’ use of
technology improves the quality of financial services
in economically prosperous conditions, it also exhibits
a higher risk of financial instability during economic
downturn. For instance, shadow deposits (e.g. PayPal
money) are not covered by a government’s guarantee on
deposits. Therefore, it is likely that these deposits will not
be covered by the deposit insurance coverage in case of
a bank run. For markets that have a high penetration rate
for ‘market finance’ solutions, the adoption of a CBDC
can help create data trails to better map the flow of funds,
thereby helping to maintain financial stability.154
150

147

148

149

 analysis, see World Bank Group and IMF ‘Fintech: The Experience So Far’,
For
EPolicy Paper No. 19/024, 2019, <www.imf.org/-/media/Files/Publications/
PP/2019/PPEA2019024.ashx>.
Bateman M, Duvendack M, Loubere N, ‘The Curious Case of M-Pesa’s
Miraculous Poverty Reduction Powers’, Developing Economics, June 2019,
<https://developingeconomics.org/2019/06/14/the-curious-case-of-m-pesas-miraculous-poverty-reduction-powers/>.
See ‘The Ins And Outs Of Inclusive Finance: Some Lessons From Microfinance And Basic Income’, UNCTAD, 2018, <https://unctad.org/system/files/
official-document/gdsmdp2017d3_en.pdf>.

151
152
153

154

B
 ateman M, Duvendack M, Loubere N, ‘The Curious Case of M-Pesa’s
Miraculous Poverty Reduction Powers’, Developing Economics, June 2019,
<https://developingeconomics.org/2019/06/14/the-curious-case-of-m-pesas-miraculous-poverty-reduction-powers/>.
Supra

note 85.
Karlan

D, et al., ‘Impact of savings groups on the lives of the poor’, PNAS
114(12), 2017, <https://www.pnas.org/content/114/12/3079>.
Kiruga

M, ‘Kenya M-Pesa Tax Risks Killing the Goose That Laid the Golden
Egg’, The Africa Report, August 2019, <www.theafricareport.com/16057/kenya-m-pesa-tax-risks-killing-the-goose-that-laid-the-golden-egg/>.
Supra

note 55.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

21

With regards to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, it
is projected to cause the first increase in global poverty
since 1998,155 and has already been seen to, and is widely
expected to continue to, fuel digital transformation in
the financial services sector.156 While digital transactions/
payments and e-money in particular have experienced a
surge in popularity since the beginning of the pandemic,
central banks around the world have already made one
thing clear: they will not be rushing the introduction of
CBDCs as a result.157 There is a clear need to separate
digital money and CBDC, as the latter is an official
counterpart of a fiat currency and not merely a digital
token representing physical value.
Further, the resilience of the Fintech credit market
remains largely unassessed. For example, during an
economic downturn, it is unclear how these Fintech
lenders will perform. The large consumer bases and
interconnectedness across financial sectors and national
boundaries of BFTs158 can give rise to significant volatility
in the financial system. Moreover, unlike traditional big
banks, the BFTs’ shadow banking encourages regulatory
arbitrage, as similar risks are regulated more tightly in the
traditional lending sector, especially since the banking
crisis of 2008.159 For instance, traditional banking sectors
are required to comply with the Basel capital adequacy
requirements and stress testing to prove their resiliency
during a time of financial stress, while BFTs are not
subject to these types of requirements.

Key extrapolations
and conclusions
Based on our research and expert analysis, we draw
the following key extrapolations and conclusions.
Despite the benefits of digitization such as broader
financial inclusion, the potential impacts over fiscal
control of weaker economies dependent on foreign
investment and aid for infrastructure development are
showing preliminary warning signs that warrant further
investigation. The impact on these economies will be
amplified and spread to additional countries, particularly
upon issuance of CBDCs by major economies such as
155

156

157

158
159

 ahler DG, et al., ‘The impact of COVID-19 (Coronavirus) on global poverty:
M
Why Sub-Saharan Africa might be the region hardest hit’, World Bank Blogs,
2020, <https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/impact-covid-19-coronavirus-global-poverty-why-sub-saharan-africa-might-be-region-hardest>.
von Allmen UE, et al., ‘Digital financial inclusion in the times of COVID-19’,
IMF Blog, July 2020, <https://blogs.imf.org/2020/07/01/digital-financial-inclusion-in-the-times-of-covid-19/>.
For reference, see Faridi O, ‘Norway Is Not in a Rush to Launch its Own Digital Currency Even though Cash Usage has Declined Significantly’, Crowdfund
Insider, November 2020, <www.crowdfundinsider.com/2020/11/168954-norway-is-not-in-a-rush-to-launch-its-own-digital-currency-even-though-cash-usage-has-declined-significanty/>.
Birla A, ‘Your Next Bank Will Be a Tech Giant’, CrunchBase, September 2020,
<https://about.crunchbase.com/blog/your-next-bank-will-be-a-tech-giant/>.
‘BIS Quarterly Review: International Banking and Financial Market Developments’, September 2018, <www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1809.pdf?mod=article_inline>.

the US and China (or GSCs based on stable currencies).
This will lead to further penetration of the much
maligned ‘dollarization’ (or stable alternative) of emerging
financial markets already prevalent in so many emerging
economies, where majority unbanked populations
are more likely to adopt easily accessible substitute
currencies.
Once foreign CBDCs and GSCs based on stable
currencies are available to citizens in LDCs, the LDC
central banks will have limited ability to control their
adoption as substitute currencies. Furthermore, greater
accessibility provided by BFTs’ tooling could restrict
central banks’ abilities to control monetary policy, playing
a role in destabilizing sovereign control and economic
agency in LDCs. LDCs issuing their own CBDCs will need
to ensure they have higher utility than foreign CBDCs or
GSCs, including low barriers to adoption, to control this
capital flight.
However, bloc currencies and even foreign CBDCs and
GSCs could provide greater stability for citizens by giving
them access to a store of value, enabling them to save
without having to overcome high barriers to entry for
banking services. They could benefit businesses as a
store of value, and as a payment instrument, reducing
cross-border trade barriers. The challenge for central
banks and governments will be to advance innovative
governance approaches that enable an influx of substitute
currency without losing tax revenues or losing currency
sovereignty.
LDCs are not at the leading edge of CBDC issuance,
and, with large unbanked populations, will be particularly
vulnerable to loss of currency sovereignty to powerful
foreign currencies, and therefore control of monetary and
fiscal policy. To mitigate this effect, LDC central banks
could work together to encourage the disbursement of
domestic stablecoins by BFTs and other Fintechs (as
synthetic CBDCs or as domestic GSCs) in preference
to foreign currencies, to maintain currency sovereignty
in the absence of a domestic CBDC. While this is a less
desirable solution than domestic issuance, if combined
with clear regulatory controls it could provide a needed
transitional solution towards domestic CBDC issuance.
Economic area partners could investigate the potential
of accelerating the development of bloc currencies to
leverage collective strength and reduce cross-border
trade barriers, encouraging adoption of those currencies
in preference to substitute currencies. While there is no
single model for global collaboration between LDC central
banks, governments and regulators, best practice could
be derived from existing economic unions such as the
Eurozone, or African RECs.
CBDCs and GSCs will provide alternative stores of value
even when held as national fiat, impacting commercial

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

22

banks, their pivotal role in moving and storing value, and
their ability to implement monetary policy. Central banks
could consider implementing monetary or fiscal policy
directly through exploiting the programmable nature of
CBDCs, for example by implementing interest (positive
or negative) on stores of value to encourage saving or
spending, demurrage to encourage spending or by levying
direct taxation on certain types of payments. These
measures may be viewed as having an overreaching
influence on private assets from a political perspective,
although in effect they would be equivalent to commercial
bank charges and interest, or Pay as You Earn (PAYE)
taxation. CBDCs as settlement instruments will impact
money supply considerations and monetary policy,
prompting new regulatory considerations and alternative
approaches to implementing monetary policy, including
directly through the design of CBDCs. Monetary policy
and financial supervision needs to be revised with
international collaboration to acknowledge these changes
and to mitigate potential negative impacts.160
BFTs can leverage large existing consumer bases in
LDC economies who are often disenfranchised from
participation in the formal financial sector to quite a high
degree. This existing consumer base, with growth in
both product depth and availability, presents a lucrative
alternative to traditional financial services. BFTs can skirt
around most prudential regulation incumbent upon banks
and other financial institutions, and this landscape of light
regulation poses concerns that BFTs may intentionally
or unintentionally distort free market competition from

160


China
proposed Global Rules on CBDC and how they can be regulated
through monitoring and information sharing. For reference, see Wilson T,
Jones M, ‘China Proposes Global Rules for Central Bank Digital Currencies’,
Reuters, March 2021, <www.reuters.com/article/cenbanks-digital-china-rules-idUSL8N2LN46B>. The Bank of Japan also recommended ‘common
rules’ on CBDCs with major central banks, see ‘BOJ Sees Scope to Set Common Rules on CBDCs with Major Central Banks’, Reuters, April 2021, <www.
reuters.com/article/cenbanks-digital-japan-idUSL4N2M1265>. Previously, a
group of seven central banks together with BIS published a report laying out
the key requirements for any publicly available CBDCs. For reference, ‘Central Bank Digital Currencies: Foundational Principles and Core Features’, Bank
of International Settlement, October 2020, <www.bis.org/publ/othp33.pdf>.

their often dominant, if not monopolistic, position. Such
a position would pose a hazard to financial stability as
deposits in non-bank institutions would rise, as well
as the ability to circumvent consumer protections
as typically found in prudential regulation targeting
only banks or traditional financial institutions.
BFTs’ ‘data-network-activities’ loop gives these
companies a competitive advantage when they enter
into financial services. While this brings benefits as
previously outlined, with no additional cost, the perils
are associated with market power, operational resilience
and data privacy. To resolve this, Mr. Agustin Carstens,
General Manager of the BIS and former Governor of
the Bank of Mexico, proposes that “[p]ublic policy
regarding big techs in finance… needs to build on a
more comprehensive approach that combines financial
regulation, competition policy and data privacy”.161
It is in light of these findings that a risk-based method
of regulation is suggested, with a focus on outcomes
in financial markets that are especially related to
global and local financial stability but also to broader
sustainable development outcomes, and which maintain
macroeconomic authority in implementing jurisdictions.
While globally interconnected financial systems are seen
as a positive outcome of global digital transformation, it
is important to ensure that markets making use of these
solutions are sufficiently able to protect both consumers
and their economies from unforeseen externalities.

161

Carstens

A, ‘Public Policy for Big Techs in Finance’, BIS Speech, January
2021, <www.bis.org/speeches/sp210121.htm>.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

23

The authors would like to express their gratitude to Raphael Auer (BIS), Ashley
Lannquist (WEF), David Birch (CSF), Sandra Ro (GBBC), Riyad Carey (GBBC),
Sofia Arend (GBBC) and the team at UNCDF/UNDP (Pamela Eser, Aiaze Mitha,
and Johannes Schultz-Lorentzen) for their insightful feedback and suggestions.
About the UN Capital Development Fund
The UN Capital Development Fund makes public and private finance work for the poor in the world’s
46 least developed countries (LDCs). UNCDF offers “last mile” finance models that unlock public and
private resources, especially at the domestic level, to reduce poverty and support local economic
development.
UNCDF’s financing models work through three channels: (1) inclusive digital economies, which
connects individuals, households, and small businesses with financial eco-systems that catalyze
participation in the local economy, and provide tools to climb out of poverty and manage financial lives;
(2) local development finance, which capacitates localities through fiscal decentralization, innovative
municipal finance, and structured project finance to drive local economic expansion and sustainable
development; and (3) investment finance, which provides catalytic financial structuring, de-risking,
and capital deployment to drive SDG impact and domestic resource mobilization.

UNDP is the leading United Nations organization fighting to end the injustice of poverty, inequality,
and climate change. Working with our broad network of experts and partners in 170 countries,
we help nations to build integrated, lasting solutions for people and planet.
Learn more at undp.org or follow at @UNDP.

This series of papers is brought to you with the support of

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3871301

10 May 2021

About the UN Development Programme

