See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/362593727

The role of Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) in Designing Crypto currency
and Digital currency
Article · August 2022

CITATIONS

READS

0

114

3 authors, including:
G. Kumar

A. Gajendran

SRM Institute of Science and Technology

SRM Institute of Science and Technology

3 PUBLICATIONS 0 CITATIONS

27 PUBLICATIONS 2 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Descriptive Study On Investors Stock Market Awareness And Their Perception Towards Investment Pattern (With Special Reference To Tamil Nadu) View project

All content following this page was uploaded by A. Gajendran on 10 August 2022.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

TELEMATIQUE
ISSN: 1856-4194

Volume 21 Issue 1, 2022
2417 – 2423

The role of Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) in Designing Crypto
currency and Digital currency
Dr. S. Jahira Parveen1, Dr. G. Kumar2, Dr.A.Gajendran3
1,2,3

Assistant Professor, College of Management, SRM Institute of Science and Technology,
Kattankulathur, Chennai, Tamil Nādu- 603203
Email: 1jahiraps@srmist.edu.in, 2kumarg@srmist.edu.in, 3gajendra@srmist.edu.in
Received 16/07/2022; Accepted 10/08/2022

Abstract
A digital currency that is encrypted is known as a crypto currency or crypto. Individual
ownership records are kept in a digital database and utilized as a means of exchange. They are
not subject to any country's official regulation, making them impervious to meddling and
manipulation. This study's objective is to research and clarify how Distributed Ledger
Technology (DLT) contributes to the development of crypto currencies and digital currency and
to study the connectivity between the crypto currencies with DLT technology and DLT
technology future applications. Data collection method for this study is secondary data from
Journals, magazines, IMF reports and RBI reports, other countries financial institutions database.
DLT is also called Block chain technology. Nowadays this technology is most important and
inevitably accepted technology in various businesses sectors. Particularly DLT uses in banking
sectors and financial institution sectors makes reductions of transaction cost, transparency in
theirs activity. Bit coin, Hyper ledger, Algorand, Ethereum and Corda R3 are the various
development platforms of DLT in the globe. More than 2500 patents filed over the last 5years
around the world and there are many research projects is going about DLT in central bank. More
than 100 big giant corporations have joined together in the block chain consortium and more
than 1.5 billion US dollar amount invested in DLT technology over the past five years.
Worldwide, many banks are ready to adopted DLT in their normal activity (World Economic
Forum 2016). Implementing of DLT application in future may be possibly in the all business
sectors with the higher security.
1. INTRODUCTION
Crypto means secret or hidden that origin from Latin and Greek meaning of hidden or secretly
supports. Cryptography is the study of techniques for secure communication by the way of using
secrets codes. Crypto currency is a tradable and decentralized digital currency and digital money.
It is designed to be used over the computerized digital ledger technology. It is a form of digital
currency built on block chain technology without central monetary authority involvement. It is
new type of virtual currency that operates in a modern way with the use of distributed ledger
technology. It is first emerged in the year of 2009 when the world’s first decentralized digital
currency that Bitcoin was created. Crypto currencies, virtual currency, or "crypto" refers to a
2417

TELEMATIQUE
ISSN: 1856-4194

Volume 21 Issue 1, 2022
2417 – 2423

collection of binary data that is intended to function as a medium of trade. An autonomous
database called a ledger is used to store information about specific coin ownership.
Crypto currency is not supported by government or RBI and it can be an asset class in payment
mechanism. But digital rupees vary from the crypto currencies, digital rupees are backed by
government. Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) introduced by RBI is different from the
crypto currency. CBDC is fiat currency and legal tender currency approved by Reserve Bank of
India. Crypto currency is not treated as legal currency in India that is privately created by block
chain method of ledger. There is no control that will be big threat to country macro economics
and financial management. Crypto currency is managed by decentralized digital ledger called as
block chain technology. They cannot be utilized outside of the ledger. It shows as a digital asset
that can be traded not used as legal currency. Crypto currencies are many namely Bitcoin,
Ethereum, Dash, Maker, Dogecoin, etc,
1.
Background and History of Crypto currency
In 2009, Nakamoto released Bitcoin and there were 50 of them in circulation at the time. Early
on, only computer lovers from around the world were responsible for the buzz (Wallace, 2011).
Mt Gox, a Japanese org., developed a platform for using Bitcoin as a buy and sell mechanism in
2010. The site has a potential risk of currency changing hands at 4.951 cents. Approximately one
US dollar used to be the total amount. The charge significantly increased as Bitcoin's popularity
grew.
According to Bohme et al. (2015), scarcity is the main foundation for the bitcoin price. It is the
basis for assigning a price to any monetary organisation. The economic authorities or the central
financial institution keeps and reserves the money under the modern use of fiat currency. The
United States' central bank has the power to modify both the absolute amount and flow of
money. The financial firm is able to produce only a certain amount of paper money in order to
control a nation's fiscal outcomes.
2.
High Return
The unique characteristics of cryptocurrency and its capacity to work with monetary features
make it a valuable asset (Briere et al., 2015). History indicates that Bitcoin is an extremely
erratic currency, but it nevertheless generates sizable profits for investors. Early Bitcoin investors
who had been holding onto their coins may have made profits of between 1000 and 10,000
percent (Bohme et al., 2015).
The interactions between the pricing determinants were examined by Ciaian et al. in (2016). The
cost for Bitcoin itself is predicted to increase owing to market demand. Newer Bitcoin would be
introduced every four years, when the existing Bitcoin supply is halved. The lack of Bitcoin will
only drive up the price. According to Kristoufek (2013), the price of Bitcoin has increased in
lockstep with searches on Wikipedia and Google Trends.
3.
Crypto currency in the Globe
Crypto currency is spread across the globe and utilizations are on the rise. Up to date it is
evolving and crossing theirs crypto hands all over the world. According to Statista Global
Consumer Survey (Bitcoin.com), Nigerians are in first place among the world; around 33 percent
2418

TELEMATIQUE
ISSN: 1856-4194

Volume 21 Issue 1, 2022
2417 – 2423

of them used and owned crypto currency. The second and third largest countries are Vietnam and
Philippines in using of crypto currency among the globe. Philippine’s central bank approved
crypto currency operations. Union Bank has introduced bitcoin ATM. Africa, Latin America,
Brazil, Peru, Mexico; Argentina adopted 11 to 16 percent crypto currency. European, Japanese
had very low levels of adoptions. Denmark has very lowest use of crypto currency. The market
of crypto currency seems to be 2.2 trillion US dollar but Americans are using very lowest percent
of crypto currencies.
4.

Types of crypto currency
Different forms of money, including a. Bitcoin (BCH), b. Ethereum (ETH), c. Litecoin
(LTC), d. Cardano (ADA), e. Polkadot (DOT), f. Stellar (XLM), g. Dogecoin (DOGE), h.
Binance coin (BNB), i. Tether (USDT), and Monero, are utilised as value tokens (XMR).These
currencies are having biggest billion dollar market cap around the world. Most of the currencies
are using Block chain technology. Some of them are open source for all. Some of them are
restricted with closed group only.
As per the experts in the field, any system that falls under the category of crypto currency must
meet the following requirements. There should not be any centralized authority and the system
should be maintained through distributed networks using block chain technology. Computers
maintain records of crypto currency units and their owners. The system decides whether new
units can be created and in case it does, decide the origin and the ownership terms. The title for
crypto currencies can be proved exclusively cryptographically. Transactions can be done through
system for change of ownership of cryptographic units
5.
Strength of crypto currency: The following can be considered as strength with regard
to Crypto currency. Without the involvement of third parties, the transfer of funds between two
or more parties will be simple. It is cheaper when compared to online transactions. As there is
anonymity, payments are safe and secure. Funds can be transferred with the lowest processing
fees. As they do not use third party intermediaries’ crypto currency transfer can be made faster as
compared to standard money transfers. Crypto currency investments can generate profits. There
are no chances of personal information leakage as one need not share his private key with
anyone. It operates 24/7 and it is not like financial institutions that are closed on the weekends
and holidays. They are hard to confiscate. It has a finite known supply as the total circulation
will be 21 billion coins. It will be distributed to network nodes in which they make blocks, with
the amount cut in blocks every four years. There is dynamic price discovery as it results in
arbitrage trade across the global market. Crypto currency payments are more widely used among
large organizations and in sectors. As it is a novel one, it has growing popularity. It is an
appreciating asset which has bucked up even during the COVID 19 depression
6.
Weaknesses of crypto currency: There are possibilities to use one’s virtual wallet or
delete one’s currency. The value of crypto currencies such as bit coins can change significantly.
As it is not regulated there are no rules in place to protect one’s business. Digital currencies
might lose its value and become obsolete if people stopped using them. Cyber-attacks against
crypto currency exchanges could result in the permanent loss of an investor's investment. They
are vulnerable to scams. It is more volatile. It has abnormal growth as there were previously only
2419

TELEMATIQUE
ISSN: 1856-4194

Volume 21 Issue 1, 2022
2417 – 2423

13000 types of crypto currencies and it has grown to Rs.50000 per unit recently. There are
chances of speculative transactions. It is popular in casino-like economies which are akin to
gambling. It has not caught up in Dollar or Euro areas.
7.
Opportunities of crypto currency: There are chances for capital formation and
migration. As it is gaining in popularity, there are prospects for crypto assets. It is also a possible
source of revenue if brought under the tax net and regulation. Governments can capitalize on its
popularity by entering the field suggested by the CBDC.
8.
Challenges of crypto currency: There is a hectic task if a government is to regulate or
manage its growth. The frauds in this field have to be traced as it may lead to money-laundering.
As there are more chances for speculation it is tough to control. It is also difficult to channelize
the resources for national growth. The field has great potential for suitable exploitation. If
properly regulated the system may generate additional capital that will serve as a growth
stimulator. This is especially vital in these volatile times in which market fluctuations often
defeat the fiscal calculations of all financial regulators. But it is dangerous to allow the present
system without proper regulation.
According to Triple A ,the Block chain and cryptocurrency technology firm, there are currently
more than 3 billion cryptocurrency users worldwide. Over 18,000 businesses now accept
payment in some kind of cryptocurrency, with the average country-level ownership rate of
cryptocurrencies being 3.9 percent. No matter the nation, people are far more likely to be
educated and young. About three out of every five cryptocurrency users are men.
(https://www.gobankingrates.com). The top 10 crypto-using nations worldwide are, according to
statistics: a. Nigeria: 32%; b. Vietnam: 21%; c. Philippines: 20%; d. Turkey: 16%; e. Peru: 16%;
f. Switzerland: 11%; g. India: 9%; h. China: 7%; i. U.S.: 6%; j. Germany: 5%; k. Japan: 4%.
9.
Distributed Ledger Technology
Distributed ledger technology (DLT) is electronic ledger using independent computer to keep
recorded, stored, shared, analyzed and synchronized transactions. DLT is a recoding common
ledger which carries more information about daily transactions of buying and selling of crypto
currencies wit h closed group. It should be transparent, secured, decentralized, efficient and low
cost manner. The block chains are classified as many, let us see the important terms a. Public
Blockchain, b. Private Blockchain c. Consortium Blockchain . (He et al., 2016; Buterin (2015).
A computerised system for tracking asset transactions called distributed ledger technology
(DLT) allows for the simultaneous recording of transactions and their associated information in
numerous locations. Distributed ledgers don't have a central data store or management features,
in contrast to conventional databases. A distributed ledger generates a record of every item and
establishes a consensus as to its authenticity since each node processes and validates every item.
Both static data, like that in a registry, and dynamic data, such that in financial transactions, can
be recorded on a distributed ledger.

2420

TELEMATIQUE
ISSN: 1856-4194

Volume 21 Issue 1, 2022
2417 – 2423

.
Figure 1: The Concept of Block chain Technology, Source: World Economic Forum

Ledger

Block 1

Block 2

Block n

Transaction records

Figure 2: The Concept of Blockchain Technology: Source: illustration based on Bitcoin
info. and Nakamoto (2008)
10.
DLT role in other businesses
Block chains applications of smart contracts are using various businesses such as contract
management, supply chain management, entertainment, music, and film industries, health care
2421

TELEMATIQUE
ISSN: 1856-4194

Volume 21 Issue 1, 2022
2417 – 2423

sectors, insurance companies, IoT systems, banking and financial services. In these industries
and companies also used DLT as good smart system for solving compliances, reduce fraud
activity, customer value chain and relationship.
11.
role in financial institutions DLT
Blockchain is a fundamental technology with the ability to significantly lower transaction costs
and transform the economy, claim Ian Siti & Lakhani (2017). According to the Harvard Business
Review, blockchain technology will have the same impact on financial organisations as the
internet had on the media (Joichi, et al., 2017). The foundation of blockchain was initially
created to support Bitcoin, the most well-known decentralised digital currency (Nakamoto,
2008). When it comes to transmitting data, information, and money, blockchain is especially
advantageous for financial transactions and institutions and has the ability to solve a lot of
difficulties (Tapscott & Tapscott 2016). Banks and financial institutions can use block chains to
handle sensitive data and provide secure infrastructure services with less risk Forrest (2016).
Many venture capital companies in USA have designed R3CEV model of DLT as Block chain
network on financial market for crypto, exchanges of capitals, ventures capitals and they created
and implemented innovative solutions to financial institution in the year of 2013. For global
payments, many of the world financial institutions made a emerging DLT as whole for
investment area. Deeply it has considered the possibility of implementation in financial
instruments exchanges through block chain technology. More than 42 banks in December 2015
have collaboratively joint ventured on DLT- driven Bitcoin system with the good IT architecture.
2. CONCLUSION
It's possible that legacy apps or systems won't be quickly replaced by blockchain technology.
Blockchain can, however, be used in conjunction with existing systems and, in the near future,
might even inspire the creation of new ones. In conclusion, as this sector is still in its exploratory
stage and there are numerous legal and technical difficulties that need to be handled, more
thorough research in this area of Blockchain Technology is required to progress the maturity of
this subject. The study provides a helpful jumping off point for upcoming research on the
creation of Blockchain applications.
3. REFERENCES
[1] .
[2] .
[3] .
[4] .

2422

Böhme, R., Christin, N., Edelman, B., & Moore, T. (2015). Bitcoin: Economics,
technology, and governance. Journal of economic Perspectives, 29(2), 213-38.
Briere, M., Oosterlinck, K., & Szafarz, A. (2015). Virtual currency, tangible return:
Portfolio diversification with bitcoin. Journal of Asset Management, 16(6), 365-373.
Buterin, V., Coleman, J., & Wampler-Doty, M. (2015). Notes on Scalable Blockchain
Protocols (verson 0.3).
Ciaian, P., Rajcaniova, M., & Kancs, D. A. (2016). The economics of BitCoin price
formation. Applied economics, 48(19), 1799-1815.

TELEMATIQUE
ISSN: 1856-4194

Volume 21 Issue 1, 2022
2417 – 2423

Forrest, C. 2016. “Microsoft Believes Blockchain Tech Could Help Fight Human
Trafficking, Child Exploitation.” May 31. http://www.techrepublic.com/article/microsoftbelieves-blockchain-tech-could-help-fight-human-trafficking-child-exploitation/.
[6] . He, W., Wu, H., & Kanwal, M. (2016, December). Proof of luck: An efficient blockchain
consensus protocol. In proceedings of the 1st Workshop on System Software for Trusted
Execution (pp. 1-6).
[7] . Joichi I, Narula N, Ali R (2017) The blockchain will do to the financial system what the
internet did to media. Harvard business review digital articles, pp 2–5.
https://hbr.org/2017/03/the-blockchain-will-do-to-banks-and-law-firms-what-theinternet-did-to-media. Accessed 27 june 2022.
[8] . Kristoufek, L. (2013). BitCoin meets Google Trends and Wikipedia: Quantifying the
relationship between phenomena of the Internet era. Scientific reports, 3(1), 1[9] . Lakhani, K. R., & Iansiti, M. (2017). The truth about blockchain. Harvard Business
Review, 95(1), 119-127.
[10] . Nakamoto, S. (2008). Re: Bitcoin P2P e-cash paper. The Cryptography Mailing List, 1-2.
[11] . Tapscott, D., & Tapscott, A. (2016). Blockchain revolution: how the technology behind
bitcoin is changing money, business, and the world. Penguin.
[12] . Wallace, B. (2011). The rise and fall of Bitcoin. Wired, 19(12).
[5] .

2423

View publication stats

