cryptography
Article

A Review of Blockchain in Fintech: Taxonomy, Challenges,
and Future Directions
Keerthi Nelaturu * , Han Du and Duc-Phong Le
Fintech Research, Bank of Canada, 234 Wellington Street, Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9, Canada;
hdu@bankofcanada.ca (H.D.); dle@bankofcanada.ca (D.-P.L.)
* Correspondence: knelaturu@bankofcanada.ca

Abstract: The primary purpose of this paper is to bridge the technology gap between Blockchain and
Fintech applications. Blockchain technology is already being explored in a wide number of Fintech
sectors. After creating a unique taxonomy for Fintech ecosystems, this paper outlines a number of
implementation scenarios. For each of the industries in which blockchain is already in use and has
established itself as a complementary technology to traditional systems, we give a taxonomy of use
cases. In this procedure, we cover both public and private blockchains. Because it is still believed to
be in its infancy, especially when it comes to financial use cases, blockchain has both positive and
negative aspects. As a result, it is critical to be aware of all of the open research issues in this field.
Our goal is to compile a list of open research challenges related to various aspects of the blockchain’s
protocol and application layers. Finally, we will provide a clear understanding of the applications for
which blockchain can be valuable, as well as the risks associated with its use in parallel.
Keywords: blockchain; fintech; use-cases; security; privacy; cryptography; smart contract



Citation: Nelaturu, K.; Du, H.; Le,
D.-P. A Review of Blockchain in
Fintech: Taxonomy, Challenges, and
Future Directions. Cryptography 2022,
6, 18. https://doi.org/10.3390/
cryptography6020018
Academic Editor: Joseph K. Liu
Received: 15 March 2022
Accepted: 11 April 2022
Published: 19 April 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons

1. Introduction
Until recently, banks were the primary players in the financial services landscape.
However, as a result of technological and entrepreneurial advancements, new business
models have emerged, introducing new participants such as start-ups and technology
firms into to the mix. This development has significantly altered how businesses and
retail customers manage their finances. These new disruptive companies, as well as the
components that contributed to it, are now commonly referred to as “Fintech”. Between
2010 and now, the amount of investment in this Fintech industry has increased dramatically,
reaching a peak of $215.4 billion USD in 2019 [1]. The market is predicted to increase at a
steady 20% rate over the next four years, reaching roughly $305 billion by 2025 [2].
1.1. The Fintech Ecosystem
The Fintech ecosystem is composed of a diverse range of players who are all committed
to innovating, increasing the competition in the financial sector, ultimately benefiting the
welfare of clients and boosting economic productivity. In [3], Lee and Shin highlighted five
distinct components of the Fintech ecosystem: Fintech startups, technology developers,
government, financial stakeholders, and traditional financial institutions.
The last decade has witnessed several technological upheavals involving domains
such as social media [4,5], artificial intelligence [6–8], big data and cloud computing [9,10],
augmented/virtual reality [11,12], and most notably blockchain [13]. Based on the applications and innovation of Fintech [14], one can classify it into numerous verticals, including:
payments and banking, investments and capital markets, lending, crowdfunding, insurance
services and loyalty programs (as shown in Figure 1).

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

Digital Payments and Banking Digital payments and banking were created to facilitate
financial transactions by leveraging global technical advancements. Digital banking

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18. https://doi.org/10.3390/cryptography6020018

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cryptography

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

2 of 52

is no longer limited to electronic banking [15]. It entails internet banking, mobile
banking, and the use of electronic cards for payment, among other things. Similarly,
the global market for digital payments is predicted to expand by $361.30 billion
USD by 2030 [16]. The payments industry encompasses any kind of transaction that
enables a payment to be made digitally.
Investments and Capital Markets Capital markets [17] are financial markets in which
buyers and sellers come together to trade stocks, bonds, and other financial assets.
Banks and investors can act as suppliers, while enterprises, governments, and individuals can act as purchasers. These markets connect suppliers and those seeking
funds, providing a venue for the trading of securities.
Lending and Borrowing Digital lending and borrowing refers to the process of borrowing,
disbursing, and managing digital channels through which credit decision-making and
intelligent client engagement are guided by digital data [18]. This sector encompasses
technology that enables financial institutions to increase production and loan profits
while simultaneously delivering faster service at the point of sale (POS). It enables
prospective borrowers to apply for loan products—such as Buy Now Pay Later
(BNPL)—from any internet-connected device and from any location in the world.
Insurance Fintech insurance is the use of technological innovation to the insurance industry. Since the GFC (https://www.gfcinsurance.com/, accessed on 15 March 2022),
insurance, like other sectors of the financial services industry, has seen numerous technological and data-driven advances. Many of advancements make use of connected
devices. Due of the volume of data that can be provided, fintech enables insurance
companies to offer dynamic pricing.
Crowdfunding Crowdfunding is a method of obtaining money for for-profit and notfor-profit organizations by reaching out to individuals who can invest in funding
projects. The ease with which technology and social media may be used has enabled
crowdfunding to reach a large audience.
Loyalty Programs Loyalty programs are critical for modern businesses because they increase customer engagement, increase retention, and give new channels for effective
marketing efforts. Numerous businesses offer loyalty programs and encourage customers to use their products in the current market. However, these programs can be
enhanced in terms of maintenance and usage by clients through the use of cuttingedge technology.
Law and Regulation In terms of information technology, the phrase regulation refers to
Fintech applications that are used in the context of regulatory monitoring, reporting,
and compliance. The rapid pace of technological innovation in financial services
necessitates a close examination of the regulatory implications. Without which, end
consumers who are unaware of these technical advancements are the most exploited.
As stated in [19], the primary potential of regulatory technology (RegTech) resides in
the current stage of technological evolution’s move from Know Your Customer (KYC)
to Know Your Data (KYD) approaches.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

3 of 52

Figure 1. Fintech Verticals.

1.2. What Is Blockchain?
In 2008, the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto, who is the inventor of the cryptocurrency Bitcoin, published a white paper titled “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash
System” [20]. The paper described in detail a payment system in which people would
directly send/receive payments to/from each other. The technology illustrated a mechanism by which payments could be performed securely without any intermediary financial
institution. Arguably, Bitcoin was the world’s first decentralized public ledger and it has
since gained global status around the world.
The underlying technology standing behind the success of Bitcoin is the blockchain
technology. This technology has also recently become a hot topic for researchers and been
argued to be an even more revolutionizing phenomenon than Bitcoin.
Simplistically, the blockchain or distributed ledger technology(DLT) as defined in
the Bitcoin whitepaper is a public, trusted and shared ledger, which is distributed to all
participants in a community over a peer-to-peer network. In this community, people may
or may not know each other, however, each member maintains his/her own copy of the
information and all members must collectively validate any change on the blockchain.
This removes the need for an intermediary third party. Blockchain is comprised by a
continuously growing list of records called blocks that contain transactions. Blocks are
protected from tampering by employing cryptographic hashes and consensus mechanisms.
This allows the blockchain to be a transparent system of machines that originates and
preserves the truth.
Public vs. Private Blockchains
Blockchains can be public (or permissionless), private or consortium (or permissioned).
Bitcoin [20] or other cryptocurrencies (e.g., Ethereum [21]) are public. Cryptocurrencies are
typically open to anyone to join the network and contribute to maintaining the integrity
of transactions. However, in many other blockchain-based applications (e.g., related
to company’s private database), service providers may want to limit access rights to
some specific groups of people. Answering the question: “who is able to join in the
network, participate in the consensus algorithm and maintain the distributed ledger”
allows developers to determine the suitability of a public or private blockchain.
In a private or a consortium blockchain platform, as opposed to a public platform, will
allow organizations to retain control and privacy while still cutting down their costs and

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

4 of 52

transaction speeds. Typical examples include Hyperledger Fabric [22] and Multichain [23].
While clients are allowed to submit transactions, only pre-determined participants have
permission to execute the consensus protocol, and update the distributed ledger as well.
These participants must be governed by informal arrangements, formal contracts or confidentiality agreements. The private or consortium systems will have lower costs and faster
speeds than a public blockchain platform can offer.
1.3. Related Work
This section discusses in detail previous works in the field of fintech and blockchain.
We begin by discussing briefly review papers in Fintech. Then we will look at articles
that are specifically related to blockchain and fintech. Finally, we describe how our work
compares to earlier works.
Numerous studies have previously been conducted to showcase disruptive technologies for Fintech applications [24–28]. The majority of these works are heavily focused on
Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence. Specifically, the authors in [25] discussed the developments in the use of these technologies in supply chain finance. They also address ongoing
technical, research, and educational challenges. Numerous works discuss various research
approaches for comprehending the Fintech landscape and provide a high-level overview
of current research trends and recognized obstacles. The research methodology entails conducting meta-analysis [26] on several Fintech business models. This also has ramifications
for and breakthroughs in technology. Even the examination of citations and co-citations, as
demonstrated in [27], can provide scholars with a starting point for delving deeper into a
particular area of inquiry. The other direction seen was evaluating the value derived from
various companies’ use of digital advances in Fintech [29]. In [30], a topical evaluation of
Fintech research was offered, as well as analysis from a stakeholder perspective, which
is unique among review works. The authors of [31] propose an industrial framework
for Fintech, outlining the numerous economic entities that make up the monetary and
capital markets umbrella of Fintech. All of the works described above address regulatory
concerns and the likelihood of financial loss that might occur when digital innovation is
implemented without conducting extensive risk analysis. Milian et al. [32] conducted a
comprehensive study of the Fintech literature dating all the way back to the 1980s. They
compiled a list of the most influential publications and created a classification system for
Fintech literature. Their study is a comprehensive review of Fintechs, however it makes no
mention of blockchain-based fintech.
In [33], Xu et al. conducted a statistical analysis of research publications on blockchain,
with a particular emphasis on business and economics. Their investigation was confined to
the quantity of research papers published in specific years, nations, or categories, including
citations. The authors of [13,34] set out to accomplish a similar goal. Their research paper
mapping study concentrated on the research subjects, constraints, gaps, and future trends
of blockchain in FinTech businesses. Rabbani et al. [35] conducted an academic study of the
scholarly literature on Islamic financial technology. Their analysis divides Islamic FinTech
into three major categories: (i) possibilities and difficulties for Islamic FinTech, (ii) sharia
compliance for cryptocurrency/blockchain, and (iii) law/regulation. Their analysis is
confined to Islamic Fintechs and is purely commercial in nature. Ref. [36] is another review
article focusing on the domestic implications of blockchain technology, specifically on
Chinese research. Finance is one of the topics they addressed in their work. The writers
in [37] conducted a comprehensive mapping analysis on 23 selected articles from a number
of fields. The work can aid the scientific community by creating a map of the available
literature, which can serve as a leaping point for future studies. Frizzo et al. [38] conducted
a comprehensive review to ascertain the current state of the art in developing blockchain
applications for enterprises in the following sectors: banking and finance, legal, accounting,
and healthcare. The authors in [39,40] conducted a systematic evaluation of the literature
to examine blockchain applications in the financial services sector. Their evaluations were
limited to the application of blockchain technology in Fintechs, rather than classifications

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

5 of 52

of blockchain-based Fintechs based on the technology’s technical properties. Ref. [40] is a
complementary work to ours that focuses on the e-finance and fintech industries. Their
research topic focuses on the fundamental concepts of blockchain technology, followed by
a consideration of the technology’s difficulties and applications. Ref. [41] is a similar work
which discusses more on the technological aspects of blockchain with limited set of case
studies. Ref. [42] conducted in-depth analyses of existing literature in order to determine
the technology’s growth into commercial spaces. In [43], the objective is to provide an
overview of the risks, costs, and benefits associated with the use of blockchain technology
in banking and financial applications. In [44] demonstrates that there is still a need for
research topics to be handled with security and privacy in mind. Works such as [45]
focus on a single technical advancement, such as IoT(Internet of Things), and provide
blockchain applications in fintech that are particular to the use of IoT devices. Several
publications focus on delving deeply into a single case study and doing a full architectural
examination of how adopting blockchain enhances the application. For instance, Ref. [46]
focused on the Triple Accounting Framework application and discussed how blockchain
may be integrated into this space. Ref. [47] focuses on production industries and the use
of blockchain for achieving faster targets. Ref. [48] targets how the concepts of smart
contracts can be implemented to enhance the current business models between individuals
and health insurance organizations. More technical papers like [49] delve into specific
software patterns used in blockchain applications and these kind of works help upcoming
researchers in implementing and using optimized patterns for blockchain applications.
In comparison to earlier research, a primary objective of this study was to expand on
both technical and non-technical aspects of blockchain, specifically in the Fintech industry.
Not only scholarly papers were included in our review, but also reports from various
financial institutions and project-specific content. We discuss a variety of use cases for
each of the fintech verticals mentioned. The use cases will demonstrate the applicability
of blockchain not just in permissionless settings, but also in the enterprise sector. This
work’s taxonomy for use cases and characterization of blockchain properties are highly
unique. We address all use cases not just from a commercial standpoint, but also from
a technical standpoint, demonstrating how they are implemented in a production-grade
system. Finally, we arrive at a prioritized list of open research issues covering all of the
technical components of blockchain that remain unexplored. This provides an obvious
diving point for any researcher interested in pursuing a topic specific to a technological
field. To our knowledge, no other publication conducts such an in-depth technical research
of the full blockchain ecosystem, complete with specifics on use cases.
1.4. Research Methodology
We describe the technique utilized to perform this review in this section, which
involves identifying research questions, acquiring resources, and screening relevant studies.
1.4.1. Research Questions
As part of our review, the first step was to identify a set of research questions that
would define the goal of this study. We define the following six research questions:
RQ1: What are the key features of blockchain-based Fintech applications?
RQ2: What are the benefits or advantages of using blockchain in Fintech?
RQ3: What are the challenges and limitations of using blockchain in Fintech?
RQ4: Are there any use cases for blockchain in Fintech?
RQ5: Identify relation between blockchain use cases and traditional financial services?
RQ6: What are the future research directions for blockchain in Fintech?
When working with two complex industries such as Blockchain and Fintech, the first
step is to comprehend the characteristics that these two sectors provide. In Section 1.1,
we define the Fintech streams’ typical verticals. RQ1 is focused on demonstrating the

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

6 of 52

well-known aspects of Blockchain that are applicable to Fintech applications. We would
also want to study the interaction of the Fintech sector and Blockchain technology using
the features offered. This is accomplished through RQ2 in the process of recognizing the
benefits and advantages of the technology. Even though blockchain was introduced in 2008,
the practicing community is currently experiencing significant modifications and there are
even plenty of new innovations being shaped within. This progress also entails a number of
theoretical and practical difficulties. We highlight the problems and constraints associated
with using this technology in the Fintech industry throughout all of the characteristics we
examine. RQ3 is concerned with identifying these constraints. The study will be reported
in Section 5. Both RQ4 and RQ5 focus heavily on case study analysis. There are several
use cases in Fintech, but are there any that are enhanced by the addition of blockchain?
Due to the presence of blockchain in the technological stack, we are curious to learn if new
paradigms are being brought into the Fintech sector, as well as monitor the evolution of
traditional financial services. By studying these questions, we will provide a taxonomy
of blockchain-based Fintech applications in Section 3. RQ6 is to propose future research
objectives for each of these domains. This will be covered in Section 5 as well.
1.4.2. Screening Process and Resources
The search approach we utilized was critical to our research. The search method began
with the identification of digital libraries and web resources that would be screened for
relevant materials. To begin, we selected indexing services that would include all publications pertaining to engineering, more specifically to computer science and developing
technologies. We utilized Dimensions AI (https://www.dimensions.ai/, accessed on 15
March 2022) a tool that encompasses publications both open and closed majorly comparable to the below mentioned indexers. It is a database that offers the most comprehensive
collection of linked data in a single platform.
1.
2.
3.

Google Scholar
Scopus
Web of Science

We again narrowed the list of papers to those published in peer-reviewed journals. We
choose four digital libraries for this purpose:
1.
2.
3.
4.

IEEE Xplore
ACM Digital Library
Science Direct (Elsevier)
Springer

One novel aspect of Blockchain is that it is available to everyone who understands how
to utilize the technology, regardless of their experience or degree. This has attracted a large
number of people who are not academics but rather technologists who have contributed
several ideas. Thus, a substantial amount of knowledge relating to blockchain is available
not just in academic papers but also in external resources. We chose a few well-known
resources for our review, listed below:
1.
2.
3.

Fintech Reports from key financial institutions e.g., KPMG, JP Morgans, PWC, etc.
Research statements from Central Banks across different countries.
Medium.com articles from prominent opinion leaders in the industry

The third list of resources included blockchain-specific organizations that are pioneers
in educating both the blockchain and financial technology sectors.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Consensys (https://consensys.net/, accessed 15 March 2022)
BlockGeeks (https://blockgeeks.com/, accessed 15 March 2022)
Eth.research (https://ethresear.ch/, accessed 15 March 2022)
Enterprise Ethereum Alliance (https://entethalliance.org/, accessed 15 March 2022)
Cointelegraph (https://cointelegraph.com/, accessed on 15 March 2022)
Websites dedicated to projects discussed in this work

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

7 of 52

After conducting the search, we were left with a massive collection of papers and
publications. To filter out irrelevant information, we utilized a set of selection criteria below:
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

Figure 2 shows the research trends on Blockchain for Fintech with the number of
publications per year. These results are collected by querying “Blockchain for Fintech”
from Google Scholar. It showed that the research interests for applying Blockchain to
Fintech have been exponentially increasing since 2015. While there were only 18 publications in 2013 (five years after the introduction of Bitcoin), there were 6540 papers
published in 2021. Similar pattern can be observed in other indexing sources as well.
Hence, our first criterion was to restrict the publishing year between 2016 to 2022.
Based on keywords found in the publications’ titles and abstracts. These keywords
were determined primarily by compiling a list of all Fintech verticals, blockchainspecific phrases, and use cases. Some of the example keywords are listed in Table 1.
The search strings were built by combining the keywords using connectors like AND
and OR. For example, one of the search strings would be: (Fintech OR Payments OR
Banking OR Lending) AND Blockchain.
We were also able to restrict the search results by citation count using a solution for
information research datasets in Dimensions AI. We utilized the technique to identify
extremely popular works in this field. This was accomplished by first searching the
tool using various search terms and then selecting references with a citation count
greater than 5 for each year beginning in 2018. Figure 3 shows the increase in the
citation count for the works since 2013 with mean citation around 5.30.
Additionally, Dimensions AI delivers a search rank based on the publication’s relevance. We chose resources with a rank greater than 100 for all search keywords.
Apart from the search restrictions, we additionally eliminated several entries using
the criteria listed below:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Papers written in other languages than English.
Master and doctoral dissertations.
Duplicated articles obtained from all four indexing databases.

Figure 2. Research Trends on Blockchain for Fintech (Source: Google Scholar).

The complete refinement process is depicted in Figure 4 for a single search string—
“review of fintech in blockchain”. Using the approach we utilized, we were able to filter
the results for this particular search string from 8876 to the 23 most relevant publications.
To facilitate reading, we have included the top twenty search phrases we used to locate
works relevant to the use cases in Table 2, along with the unique resource count for

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

8 of 52

each. The search phrase is constructed by prefixing “Blockchain OR DLT AND Fintech”
to serve as a common string for all of the terms listed. For instance, the correct search
term for decentralized applications would be “Blockchain OR DLT AND Fintech AND
Decentralized Applications”.

Figure 3. Citations Total (Source: Dimensions AI).
Table 1. Keywords selection.

Criterion
General
Fintech Verticals

Blockchain related

Use cases

Keywords
Fintech,
Blockchain,
DLT,
Enterprise blockchains
payments, banking, investments, capital markets, lending, crowdfunding, insurance services, loyalty programs, supply chain
Public or private blockchains, permissioned,
permissionless, bitcoin, ethereum, hyperledger, smart contracts
Decentralized Applications, stablecoins, digital currency, exchanges, oracles, decentralized finance

Figure 4. Sample search results refinement process.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

9 of 52

Table 2. Keywords selection.

Search String
Decentralized applications
Payments OR Digital Banking
Capital markets
Insurance
Health
Stablecoins
Digital currency
Oracles
Decentralized Finance
Smart contracts
Digital lending
Digital Borrowing
Regtech
Law AND Regulation
Governance
Identity
CBDC
Decentralized Exchanges
Storage
Marketplaces

Count
5
4
3
2
4
2
2
2
2
5
7
3
1
3
1
2
1
3
5
1

Numerous academic areas have examined blockchain technology. We conduct a
thorough evaluation of existing research in order to gain a better understanding of how
blockchain might be used in Fintech. On the one hand, we examine the roles that blockchain
technology may play in resolving current Fintech challenges like as access control, data
storage, privacy, and confidentiality. On the other hand, we examine the possible difficulties
that blockchain-based solutions may encounter as a result of their unique properties. We
make recommendations based on our findings about how to overcome such obstacles when
integrating blockchain to Fintech.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 delves into the fundamental
principles and characteristics of Blockchain and smart contracts. Section 3 introduces a
taxonomy organized on financial sectors and blockchain work streams. In this section, we
provide with a list of key characteristics that blockchain provides with when included along
with Fintech services which is to answer our question in RQ1. In the same section, we also
highlight how blockchain transforms the Fintech industry by listing out all the features.
This is to cover question RQ2. In Section 5, we examine the open research problems in the
blockchain finance field as to cover the question in RQ3. Additionally, we discuss existing
blockchain use cases that fit inside the finance industry. This is to answer question in RQ4
and RQ5. In Section 6, we summarize our work and make recommendations for future
work as a means to answer RQ6.
2. Background
Firstly, this section briefly recalls basic concepts in the blockchain technology. Then,
we review its core principles, as well as cryptographic primitives used in the blockchain.
Lastly, we explore the concept of smart contracts.
Table 3 describes some important concepts that are used in blockchain and applicable
to Fintech applications.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

10 of 52

Table 3. Concepts used in DeFi.

Concept
AMM

Block
Blockchain

Consensus
Cross-chain

dApps

DAO

Ethereum
Fork

Genesis Block
Node
Mining
Mining pool

Smart Contract

UTXO

Wallet

Definition
Automated Market Makers, a type of decentralized exchange (DEX)
protocol that relies on a mathematical formula to automatically
price assets.
A data structure within the blockchain database that collects transactions in a period of time and permanently recorded on the blockchain
A distributed ledger stored across a peer-to-peer (P2P) network. A
blockchain consists of blocks where transactions are permanently
recorded by appending blocks.
A mechanism that is used in blockchain systems to reach an agreement on the network’s current state for the network’s nodes.
Complete decentralisation cannot be achieved unless people on
different blockchains are interconnected with each other through
one common protocol. Cross-chain technology aims to solve this
problem by adding interoperability between different blockchains.
It means they will all be able to communicate with each other and
share data.
Decentralized Applications that can operate autonomously, typically
through the use of smart contracts, that runs on a decentralized
computing, blockchain system.
A decentralized autonomous organization (DAO) is a software running on a blockchain that offers users a built-in model for the collective management of its code.
A decentralized,
open-source blockchain with smart
contract functionality
A change of blockchain protocol or data in a public blockchain. It
can be a hard fork, resulting in two blockchains or a soft fork, still
maintaining one blockchain.
Also called Block 0, is the very first block upon which additional
blocks in a blockchain are added.
A copy of the ledger operated by a user on the blockchain.
The process of creating a new valid block of transactions to the
blockchains. Nodes mining are called miners.
A collection of miners who come together to share their processing
power over a network and agree to split the rewards of a new block
found within the pool.
A contractual governance of transactions between two or more parties that is enforced and verified programmatically with blockchain
technology instead of by a central authority.
UTXO stands for Unspent Transaction Output.
The remaining amount of digital currency after executing a
cryptocurrency transaction.
A digital wallet that allows users to store and manage their digital
assets such as Bitcoin, Ether, and other cryptocurrencies. Basically, it
includes an wallet address derived from the user’s public key, and a
private key authenticating for transactions related to the wallet.

2.1. How Does a Blockchain Work?
The nomenclature of blockchains derives from the how the data structure is essentially
a chain of transaction blocks. Each block is in chronological order and linked to the
previous block. As defined in [20], Bitcoin, known as the first blockchain, is “a chain of
digital signatures”. The Bitcoin system allows the self-mediation of exchange by enabling
each coin owner to transfer an amount of coins directly to any other party in the network
without the need of a trusted third party to act as the intermediary financial institution.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

11 of 52

Furthermore, these transactions are recorded, publicly verified and stored on the blockchain
network without a central governing authority.
Figure 5 describes how a transaction works on blockhain-based systems. Each transaction has an identifying code, known as a hash, generated using a cryptographic hash
algorithm. This hash value contains the original piece of information of the transaction. The
hash values of the transactions in a period of time are combined together in a block by using
“Merkle Tree”. Each block also is back-linked to the previous block, so-called parent block,
through the “previous block hash field” in its block header. This sequence of linking hash
values creates a chain to the first block, so-called genesis block. The previous hash in the new
block ensures that the blocks are not tampered with and hinders cheating. The timestamp
on the other hand proves that the transactions were made at the specific time [20].

Figure 5. How does a blockchain work? (https://blogs.thomsonreuters.com/answerson/blockchaintechnology/, accessed 15 March 2022).

The participants together enhance and continue the blockchain by complying strict
rules and general agreement, which mean that the participants agree on how the chain
will be updated. This agreement is called “the consensus mechanism”. The cryptographic
algorithms and techniques used in blockchain technology such as Merkle tree, digital
signatures protect the blockchain’s integrity, authenticity and anonymity.
The building blocks in the blockchain technology are as follows:
•

Cryptography: In the first blockchain system, Bitcoin, the main purpose of cryptography is to provide the integrity and authenticity of transactions [20]. While the
former is ensured by using hash functions [50], the latter is ensured by secure digital
signatures [51]. The signatures play a double role additionally serving as an identity
due to the properties of public-private key pairs. Only one who possesses the private
key can generate a digital signature for a document. This digital signature hence
ensures the strong control of ownership. In subsequent developments, with new
found focuses around digital privacy, new cryptographic primitives such as special
digital signatures [52], zero-knowledge proofs [53] or cryptographic commitments [54]
have been developed to provide solutions in blockchain systems.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

12 of 52

•

•

•

Smart Contract: Bitcoin was initially designed for peer-to-peer (P2P) money transfer
only. However, it soon showed the potential to be used for any kind of P2P value
transaction on top of the Internet. The concept of smart contracts [55] was later
introduced but ignited significant interest and popularity. Typically the contract
layer is decoupled from the blockchain layer, where the ledger itself is used by smart
contracts that trigger transactions automatically when certain pre-defined conditions
are met. By decoupling the smart contract layer from the blockchain layer, blockchains
like Ethereum aim to provide a more flexible development environment than the
Bitcoin blockchain.
A Distributed Network: Blockchain technology functions via a peer-to-peer network
where information is stored in all participant nodes [20]. Validators (i.e., nodes) work
come to a consensus about a fact witnessed by all parties in a common epoch. To
secure the network against majority attacks, the network must have enough competing
entities who are large enough to weather sudden arrivals/departures of competitors.
Network servicing protocol: A block containing a list of transactions, a Merkle root
value, previous block’s hash value, timestamp, etc., is broadcast to and maintain
on participants in the network. Public blockchain such as Bitcoin usually offers an
available reward for computing power that serves the network [20]. The nodes serving
the network create and maintain a history of transactions by working to solve proofof-work mathematical problems. More serving nodes the blockchain is more secure.

Blockchain technology possesses the following characteristics that would make
blockchain-based applications secure:
•

•
•

First, the consistency of the global state is probabilistic. In most decentralised consensus mechanisms, it is not possible to determine which entity will update and solve
the challenge next or at any given time. To obtain a good chance to be chosen as the
next block’s creator, an attacker must own more than 50% computing power of the
total network.
Second, all transactions’ integrity and authenticity are protected by using hash functions and digital signatures.
Third, consistency and correctness is enhanced because of the block history. Each block
is chained by the hash of the previous block in the chain. Tampering with a transaction
would make the hash value of all subsequent blocks in the chain wrong. This would be
immediately noticed by other validators in the network who are continuously keeping
verifying the transactions and refusing to accept transactions that are not consistent
with the known longest chain.

2.2. Cryptographic Primitives
This section briefly reviews cryptographic techniques currently used in the blockchain
technology. A taxonomy is depicted in Figure 6. These cryptographic algorithms can
be classified in five (5) groups: hash functions, commitments, accumulators, signatures,
and proofs.
2.2.1. Hash Functions
A hash function H is a cryptographic function that maps an arbitrary message to a fixed
length output, that is, H : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1} Lh , where Lh is a constant, the length of the hash
function. A hash function have the following cryptographic properties:
•
•
•
•

First-preimage resistant or one-way: Given a hash value h = H(m), it should be impossible
to recover the message m.
Second-preimage resistant: Given a message m, it should be infeasible to find a message
m0 6= m such that H(m0 ) = H(m).
Collision resistant: For a hash function H, it should be infeasible to find two messages
m 6= m0 such that H(m) = H(m0 ). .
Zero resistant: It is infeasible to find a message m such that H(m) = 0.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

13 of 52

While SHA-2 [50], especially the variant SHA256, were widely implemented in
blockchains, RIPEMD160 [56,57] were also used in Bitcoin [20] and Ethereum [21]. Litecoin [58], forking from Bitcoin, and some other blockchains implemented SCrypt [59]
instead of SHA256 to avoid ASIC hardware mining. Other hash functions, including
Ethash [21] and Equihash [60] were also implemented in blockchain systems.

Figure 6. Cryptographic Algorithms used in the Blockchain Technology.

2.2.2. Merkle Tree
A Merkle tree [61] is a binary tree where the parent’s node values are hash values of the
concatenation of the children’s node values.

F ( x parent ) = H(F ( xle f t )kF ( xright )),
where H denotes the one-way function. In practice, cryptographic hash functions, e.g.,
SHA-2 would be chosen to implement such a one-way function.
In blockchains, leaves at the bottom of the Merkle tree are the hash values of the
transactions during a period of time (see Figure 7). The nodes in the above row are the
hash values of the concatenation of the corresponding two hashes below it in the tree. The
number of nodes reduces by half. This processes is repeated recursively until the root of
the tree that is a single hash. Figure 7 shows how to create a block with four transactions
A, B, C and D. The Merkle tree allows users to copy/store just the small part of the tree,
the authentication path, but still be assured that all of data’s correctness is verified. The
authentication path of a leaf lea f i is a list of the nodes that are siblings on the path from
the Merkle root to the leaf lea f i . For example, the authentication path of node A consists
of H ( B) and H (C k D ). If a attacker tries to make a fake transaction into the bottom of a
Merkle tree, this will effect to all the node at the higher levels, including the Merkle root
that was stored in all users. That is an invalid proof of work.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

14 of 52

Figure 7. Merkle Tree in Blockchain Technology (https://yos.io/2016/05/19/merkle-trees-in-elixir/,
accessed on 15 March 2022).

2.2.3. Digital Signature
Digital signatures based on asymmetric cryptography [62], are used to validate the
authenticity and integrity of a digital message or asset. In cryptocurrencies, digital signatures
can be used as a mean to prove the ownership of coins/tokens. The sender signs on the
message due to his private key and the receiver uses the sender’s public key to verify the
validity of the digital signature.
ECDSA
The most popular digital signature used in the blockchain technology is the Elliptic
Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA), the elliptic curve analogue of the DSA [63].
This signature scheme was proposed by Scott Vanstone in 1992 [64]. It became popular
and was accepted as the ISO 14888-3 standard in 1998 [65], the ANSI X9.62 standard in
1999 [51], and the IEEE 1363-2000 standard in 2000 [66].
Special Signatures
Bitcoin provides only pseudonymity, its transactions thus could be traceable and
linkable, and thus users could be de-anonymized. In order to ensure the sender’s privacy, a
blockchain can implement a special signature algorithm, such as one-time signatures [67],
ring signatures [52] or blind signatures [68]. By using ring signatures, one can sign a message
on behalf of a group without revealing herself. Monero [69] combined the ideas of one-time
signature and ring signature to create one-time ring signatures, in which private key can
be used only once to generate a digital signature on behalf of a group. That blockchain
also implemented Borromean (ring) signatures [70], an extension of ring signatures. Blind
signatures [68] can be used to provide anonymity and inlinkability in case the transaction’s
owner and the signer are different parties. This signature scheme was implemented
in BlindCoin [71]. Otherwise, multisignatures [72] can be used when a group of users
commonly sign in a single document. In the blockchain technology, multisignatures can
be used to increase to security of wallets. Multisignatures in [73] offers an aggregation of
public keys that allows a smaller signature stored on the blockchain.
2.2.4. Accumulators
The cryptographic accumulator, formally introduced by Benaloh and de Mare in
1993 [74], is a one-way function that can prove the membership without revealing any
individual member in the underlying set. Their construction is based on the RSA problem.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

15 of 52

Another efficient construction of accumulators is based on cryptographic pairing [75],
a bilinear map constructed over elliptic curves with low embedding degrees [76].
In the blockchain technology, a cryptographic accumulator can be used in building other cryptographic primitives, such as commitments and borromean ring signatures [70,77]. In fact, Zerocoin deployed an accumulator to eliminate trackable linkage in
the Bitcoin blockchain, which would make transactions anonymous and more private [78].
2.2.5. Homomorphic Commitments
A cryptographic commitment scheme allows us to commit to a value while preserving
its secrecy (with the ability to reveal it later) by publishing its hash value. A binding
factor can be used when data size is small to prevent a brute-force attack. A commitment
Com(m, r ) to message m and a blinding factor r has the following property:
•
•

Hiding: one party wants to commit the message m without revealing the content of
m itself.
Binding: if one party makes a commitment to m, she/he cannot open it to a different
message m0 .

Pedersen Commmitment
Pedersen commitment [54] is a commitment scheme, which is binding under discrete
logarithm assumption. Given an elliptic curve E defined over a finite field GF ( p). Assume
that E has a group of point of large order q in which the discrete logarithm is hard, and
two random public generators g and h. The commitment of a message m is a point c on
the elliptic curve E that binding a message m and a random r to a point c on E. Pedersen
commitment is defined as follows:
Com(m, r ) = gm hr
It would be infeasible to calculate another pair m0 , r 0 that can produce the same
commitment Com(m). Pedersen commitment has additional property:
Additively homomorphic: if m = m1 + m2 , and r = r1 + r2 , then Com(m, r ) = Com(m1 , r1 )
+Com(m2 , r2 ).
Petersen commitment is used in cryptocurrencies such as Monero, Zcoin, Bytecoin, etc.
to keep the amount of transactions confidential.
2.2.6. Zero-Knowledge Proofs
Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKP) [53] is a proof protocol between a prover and a verifier
so that the verifier, after accepting the proof, learn nothing more than what she knows
before receiving the proof from sender. Zcash [79] creators implemented and popularized
zk_SNARKs [80], a zero-knowledge succinct non-interactive argument of knowledge protocol, aiming to provide perfect privacy for not only sender and but also the amount in transactions. Another ZKP protocol is used in blocchain is Bulletproofs [81], a non-interactive
and aggregatable inner-product range proof, that allows proving that a committed value
lie in a give range.
2.3. Smart Contracts
Smart contracts, first envisioned by Szabo in 1994 [55], are a complementary technology
to blockchain. The following is a functionally recognized definition of smart contracts:
Smart contracts are digital contracts that allow for decentralized consensus-based terms
that are tamper-proof and often self-enforcing via automatic execution [82]. The primary
purpose of smart contracts was to eliminate the need for centralized institutions to serve
as authorizers or verifiers in transactions and to automate the whole financial process.
The exact guarantees and features of smart contracts can vary across different blockchain
technologies, but in general systems share a common goal of providing a robust system
along with a safe general purpose language to allow payments on the platform to be

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

16 of 52

programmed for more complicated scenarios than a simple fund transfer. Typically they
are implemented as high-level objects that co-exist on the blockchain with transactions and
other data being stored on the blockchain. They could be made for one time use cases such
as using a Hashed Timelock Contract (HTLC) [83] for an automated future payment as
well as persistent and long-lived use cases such as Decentralised Exchanges [84] as well.
Most implementations of smart contracts are designed for decentralised use cases in mind
so that users can minimize their reliance on trusted-third parties, however they often will
share the same pitfalls and vulnerabilities as the payments layer of the system.
2.3.1. Hashed Timelock Contracts
Secure escrows traditionally rely on a trusted third party to secure the funds and
ensure that the funds are transferred to the recipient upon meeting preset criteria. Since
blockchains are decentralised, there arose a need to invent a method to perform secure
escrowing without a trusted third party and thus the Hashed Timelock Contract (HTLC)
was invented [85,86]. It is one of the most important and widely used innovations in
the blockchain space as it is often used to bridge tokens from one chain to another via
cross-chain atomic swaps that facilitate secure funds transfer on two separate blockchains
simultaneously.
The concept of a HTLC takes advantage of the security of a cryptographic hash as
the main primitive that enables this innovation. They typically are composed of initial
funds sent by the creator of the secure escrow, a hash of a secret, an expiry condition, and a
recipient account. Knowledge of the secret in addition to a call to trigger the HTLC results
in the funds being sent from the secure escrow to the recipient account. Depending on
the scenario it will be appropriate for the hash of the secret to be generated either by the
recipient or the sender. The expiry condition is typically a proxy for some future time, after
which the secure escrow can be triggered to return funds to the original creator. These
HTLCs can be chained in succession by the hash of the secret to give arise to much more
complicated contingent payment structures.
2.3.2. Cross-Chain Swap
By using two HTLCs on two separate systems we can construct a cross-chain swap [87,88]
that ensures that two parties swap one asset for another on two separate chains without
the two blockchains building specific functionality for bridging across the two chains. In
other words, it is a trustless swapping mechanism across two separate systems that does
not require the systems to implement any bridging mechanism for the specific use case.
When the HTLC is available as a primitive on both systems, as long as both parties can
negotiate and agree on some conditions, swapping assets between systems is trivialized.
The overall construction of a swap is as follows:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Alice generates a secret and sends the hash of the secret to Bob out of band while
negotiating the details for the secure escrows on both chains;
Alice generates an HTLC with her funds and the hash of the secret;
Bob generates an HTLC with his funds and the hash of the secret;
Alice reveals the secret to collect the funds from Bob’s HTLC thereby revealing the
secret to Bob who also collects the funds from Alice’s HTLC;

During this process, no chain specific functionality was used on either blockchain,
only each blockchain’s internal HTLC primitive was invoked.
2.3.3. Bridges
A critical aspect of Fintech is the presence of massive legacy systems that cannot be
converted overnight into a decentralized architecture. It will take considerable time and
evolution for Fintech to implement blockchain. To address this issue, we have developed the
notion of bridges, which may be utilized by private blockchain networks in conjunction with
the HTLC and cross-chain exchange concepts. A blockchain bridge may be thought of as a
link between disparate blockchains [89]. For instance, consider connecting a Hyperledger

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

17 of 52

Fabric ledger to the Ethereum network. The bridges operate as controllers, allowing them to
disclose the ledger’s data pieces based on their authorization. Bridges have been classified
in a variety of ways depending on their purpose. The most often being: Trusted and
Trustless bridges [90].
•

•

Trusted bridges: These bridges are backed by a central authority that guarantees the
integrity of the activities that pass over them. This means that users of this bridge
must develop a relationship of trust with the entity that manages it. Multichain is an
example of this sort of bridge.
Trustless Bridges: These are bridges that are not controlled by a third party. Smart
contracts or their own consensus algorithms regulate the bridge. Connext, cBridge,
and Hop are a few examples.

3. Overview of Blockchain Platforms in Fintech
This section discusses the content necessary to respond to a handful of the research
questions posed in Section 1.4. We begin by outlining all of the functional areas where
blockchain can add value when combined with Fintech solutions. We next give a detailed
classification of blockchain platforms using a multi-level methodology, highlighting both
the common essential characteristics shared by all platforms and the fundamental dividing
factor. Finally, we compare numerous projects to the classification’s categories and provide
their current status.
3.1. How Blockchain Transforms Fintech Industry?
The Fintech industry in the last decade has seen a large number of transformations
due to the disruption in various technologies like Artificial Intelligence, Cloud computing
and Blockchain. Specifically with blockchain, the amount of disruption spans across all the
Fintech verticals. Below we list the core functional areas in which blockchain adds benefits.
3.1.1. Disintermediation
Conventional banking methods involve dependency on intermediaries at all levels.
Every transaction requires a counter-party in order to process. This causes bottlenecks and
systems prone to single points of failure. Disintermediation refers to the reduction of the
use of intermediaries between producers and consumers. The essence of blockchain is to
induce decentralization into this fintech workflow in effect eliminating the middleman. In
a blockchain network, there is no single entity that controls the transactions. Depending on
the chosen consensus mechanism, the network as a whole agrees upon the state changes in
a trustless manner.
3.1.2. Immutability and Transparency
A principal challenge in the Fintech industry is the lack of visibility to the consumers.
Consider any sector like Trade Finance or Cross-border payments, the consumer is walking
blind with no intuition as to the fees structure or the resources available for usage. Transparency acts as pillar that can bridge gap between the customer and financial institutions.
Blockchain is powerful in increasing transparency as no one party controls the information
processed in the network and cannot be manipulated at the whim of an entity. Every
transaction that updates the state is recorded by either all the network participants or
the involved parties depending on the choice of architecture. The recorded state is immutable and cannot be prone to manipulation. This also simplifies auditing and regulatory
requirements enabling observation of the flow of money in real-time.
3.1.3. Timeliness
Automation and instant execution of traditional contracts has been one of the focus
areas for the past few years. Traditional financial contracts usually take 1–4 days for
execution with the added manual intervention which can be as part of the remittance
system or escrow or due to the requirement of physical presence for a signature. With the

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

18 of 52

introduction of smart contracts, we are able to achieve instant transactions along with the
substitution of the escrow and use of digital signatures.
3.1.4. Cost Optimization
Time can always be attributed to money. The cutting down of middlemen, making the
process visible to all and reducing the time evolves into the introduction of new business
models with upgraded cost structures. The benefits around cost can be ascribed to the
reduced infrastructure costs, operation costs, documentation costs and transaction costs.
Several studies [91,92] suggest that around 20 billion USD cost savings can be observed in
areas of cross-border payments, trade finance and regulatory compliance.
3.1.5. Privacy and Security
Fintechs in general deal with highly-sensitive data related to both individuals and
enterprises. Fraud, security breaches and cyber-attacks are the top threats to the rise of
Fintech. With most of the Fintech services going online enterprises collect tremendous
amounts of data about customers and insights. Protecting and providing this data to the
relevant parties in a secure manner is also a challenge. With the usage of cryptographic
primitives imbibed in the blockchain infrastructure, the ability to make any data accessible
to the authorized individuals without any leakage is easier.
3.2. Classification of Blockchain Platforms
There are several parts and aspects that make up a blockchain. It is as if these parts
are Lego bricks that you can put together in different ways to make new technological
advances. These components can be used to classify the many projects in this sector. In
this Fintech-focused study, we first classify blockchains based on their permissioned or
permissionless nature, and then, as illustrated in Figure 8, a further classification is based on
specific characteristics. Based on the Taxonomy of blockchain systems defined in [93] and
the different applications in the blockchain ecosystem that have been disrupted in recent
years, we have formulated these characteristics. Below we define these characteristics on a
high-level:

Figure 8. Classification of Blockchains.

Consensus: A blockchain is a distributed ledger system maintained by a network of nodes.
As ledger data are changed, each of these parties must agree on the authenticity of
the revisions. Consensus mechanisms for blockchain networks are composed of a set
of rules and principles that facilitate agreement [94]. Each blockchain network has its
own consensus algorithm. There are two extensively utilized consensus algorithms
across major blockchain networks. The first is proof of work (POW) [20], which is
employed in both the Bitcoin and Ethereum networks at the moment. POW requires
participants to mine blocks and attach them to the chain once they are confirmed

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

19 of 52

as valid. These blocks must be provided in such a way that the block’s hash begins
with a certain number of zeros. The count is determined by a difficulty level that
varies according to the network’s congestion. As the difficulty of the block grows, the
effort required to produce it can become exponentially more difficult. While proof
of work enables an unbiased selection of miners, it comes with a slew of downsides.
Specifically, the process of producing the block consumes a lot of energy, and the
network is also vulnerable to 51 percent attacks [95]. Another extensively used
algorithm is Proof of Stake (POS) [96]. Ethereum is expected to transition to a fully
POS network in the last quarter of 2022. In POS, instead of miners, validators are
chosen according on a consensus rule. By incorporating the network’s transactions,
the chosen validator offers the block for the current round. Other validators in the
network can monitor and certify the correctness of the present validator’s work. Even
POS has drawbacks, such as the nothing at stake problem and long-range attack [97].
As a result, it is up to the network participants to decide which consensus to use
based on the requirements of the product or platform.
Smart contracts: As mentioned in Section 2, smart contracts are rules that can be automatically enforced upon the fulfilment of specified criteria without the intervention of a
third party. Each blockchain contains its own virtual computer, which each network
participant must operate in order to analyse and process transactions. We can interface with the virtual machines using a low-level assembly language or a high-level
language such as Solidity, which supports the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM).
Thus, the support for smart contracts and the high-level language can also play a role
in determining which blockchain network is most suited for a given use case.
Transaction Model: The transaction model defines the internal structure of the distributed
ledger. This also influences how modifications to the ledger are stored in the ledger’s
memory. There are two widely used transaction models: Unspent Transaction Outputs (UTXO) and account-based. Each transaction in the UTXO model results in the
production of additional outputs. These outputs are the only ones that can be used
in subsequent transactions. For instance, suppose Alice owes Bob 30 BTC in Bitcoin.
She can use an existing output tag of 40 BTC to send 30 BTC to Bob. The transaction’s
outputs would be a new output tag containing 30 BTC owned by Bob and 10 BTC
held by Alice. Alice may use the ten bitcoins in any subsequent transactions. She is
unable to use the earlier 40 BTC output tag because it is no longer valid. The same
holds true for Bob. In contrast, the account model requires the system to keep a tree of
accounts and their balances. Whenever a transaction between two accounts is issued,
like in the preceding example, if the transaction is legitimate, meaning Alice has at
least 30 BTC in her account balance and is permitted to handle the account, she can
transfer it to Bob. On Bob’s side, he should have an account at the address specified
by Alice in the transaction. In this situation, there is no need to track any output tags.
However, each model offers a number of distinct advantages and downsides.
Governance: On-chain governance and off-chain governance are two distinct types of
blockchain governance [98]. On-chain governance refers to the decentralised enforcement of protocol rules and smart contracts. In these instances, governance norms will
be referred to as Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs) [99]. Off-chain
governance, on the other hand, refers to the rules and decision-making processes
followed by the protocol’s owners or the network’s members as a whole. Off-chain
governance methods on public blockchains include discussions on social media,
online forums, conferences, and other events. In particular, governance systems in
enterprise scenarios should incorporate both off-chain and on-chain components.
Extensibility: Due to the fact that blockchain is being used in the Fintech ecosystem, it
must demonstrate durability, upgradeability, and maintainability features. This is
commonly referred to as extensibility. Since the inception of blockchain technology,
the majority of networks have encountered a variety of challenges, both in terms of

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

20 of 52

protocols and hacks. However, these same networks have overcome these obstacles.
They have modernised the protocols. Issues with the codebase have been resolved.
This capability is critical for a technology that is still in its infancy. Additionally,
the presence of heterogeneous blockchains and DLT networks necessitates the establishment of communication between these systems. This interoperability situation
adds complexity, yet it is a necessary condition for advancing the use of DLT in
enterprise contexts.
Currency or Token: Numerous transactions are carried out on blockchains, which necessitates resource allocation by participants. In order to operate the network decentralised
and equitably handle all transactions from all participants, the network must have
incentive systems. These incentive mechanisms are reinforced by the use of either a
system-wide native currency or a token that may be connected with ownership. Ether
(ETH) is an example of a native currency, whereas ERC20 is an example of a token
on the Ethereum network. The distinction is that actions within the virtual machine
must be compensated in local currency, whilst certain apps are valued in ERC20.
Privacy: At all levels of the terrain, financial organisations are extremely concerned about
privacy. With transparency being a primary purpose of blockchains, privacy is a
critical concern. When it comes to financial services, privacy may be characterised in
three ways from the user’s perspective [100], including: transactional confidentiality,
user anonymity, and unlinkability. Transactional confidentiality implies that no
information about user transactions may be released without prior consent. Any
malicious assaults on the system as a whole must nonetheless protect the system
against user data leakage. Secondly, user anonymity requires that except for the user
and the participating party in a given transaction, no other entity in the network
should be aware of any specifics of the transaction, including the sender and receiver’s
identities. Finally, unlinkability implies that the inability of users to be associated
with transactions. The ability to link a specific user to a transaction might result in
the user’s anonymity being compromised and all transactions related with the user
being disclosed.
Security: On the other side, security needs might be classified similarly to privacy requirements. At the system level, it is required that the distributed ledger should
be immutable and reliable, that is, the ledger should be consistent among network
participants. No contradictions should occur as a result of the reconciliation, clearing,
and settlement processes. It is also required that the system must provide a high
availability. The majority of transactions are intended to have low latency and to complete without causing system disruption. At the transactional level, the transaction
integrity must be maintained throughout the ledger’s existence. In the Fintech sector,
online transactions mostly include equity bonds, investments, and different high-risk
assets. Thus, intentional falsification and forgery of transactions should be prohibited.
Last but not least, preventing double-spending attacks on blockchain-based payment
systems must be a desirable security feature.
Scalability: When it comes to blockchain performance, two critical variables are monitored:
transaction throughput and confirmation delay. Centralized payment systems, such
as banks, achieve a high level of optimization in terms of these two criteria. Whereas,
blockchains confront significant issues in maintaining decentralisation. Scalability
concerns extend deep into the system’s numerous levels. This might be due to
consensus constraints, the ledger state’s structure, or reliance on external players, all
of which result in confirmation delays. Thus, a project may be differentiated from
others based on the solution chosen for a particular scalability challenge.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

21 of 52

3.3. Comparison between Platforms
We have chosen many projects to review from both public and private blockchains that
are highlighted in Table 4. These initiatives were chosen due to their inherent collaborations
within Fintech sector.
Table 4. A Summary of Blockchain platforms and Applications.
Platform
Bitcoin
Ethereum
Cardano
IOTA
Algorand
Hyperledger Fabric
R3 Corda
Quorum
Multichain
Diem

Consensus
Proof of work
Proof of work
Ouroboros Proof of stake
Fast Probabilistic Consensus
Pure proof of stake
CFT & BFT
Validity & Uniqueness consensus
RAFT and IBFT
PBFT
DiemBFT

Transaction Model
UTXO
Account
UTXO
UTXO
Account
Account
UTXO
Account
UTXO
Account

Throughput
7 TPS
15 TPS
257 TPS
1500 TPS
1000 TPS
3000 TPS
15-1678 TPS
900 TPS
1000 TPS
3 TPS

Private Transactions
Shadow Addresses and Mixing
ZK Proofs
ZK proofs
CoinMixing
None
Channels & ZK proofs
Inherent support
ZK proofs
Streams
None

Currency/Token
BTC
ETH
ADA
IOTA
ALGO
None
None
ETH
Custom
DIEM

Applications
Payments
Dapps
Dapps
IoT devices
Payments
Enterprise
Enterprise
Dapps
Enterprise
Payments

3.3.1. Bitcoin
Bitcoin [20] is the first public blockchain that does not require users any permission to
join the network. The consensus mechanism is based on proof-of-work. Miners use energy
to validate transactions and construct new blocks. Miners receive rewards in the form of
local currency BTC for successfully mining valid blocks. Scripting languages enable the
inclusion of complicated transactions that go beyond money. Scalability is a bottleneck
of Bitcoin network. At the moment, it only supports around seven (7) transactions per
second. To anonymize transactions, coin mixing or tumblers, and shadow addresses can be
utilised [101]. Mixing is a term that refers to a service that jumbles bitcoins in private pools
and distributes them to the appropriate recipient anonymously. The term “shadow address”
refers to a feature built into the protocol that generates a new address for the sender with
each transaction. Payments are the most often utilised use case for Bitcoin.
3.3.2. Ethereum
Ethereum [21] is yet another permissionless blockchain. Similar to Bitcoin, Ethereum
currently uses the proof-of-work consensus mechanism to achieve an agreement among
participants in the network. The primary distinction is the inclusion of smart contracts and
the use of an account-based storage approach. On top of Ethereum, smart contracts may
be developed using a variety of high-level programming languages such as Solidity. The
network achieves a throughput of roughly 15 transactions per seconds, which is somewhat
faster than bitcoin. On this network, decentralised applications (Dapps) are extremely
easy to develop. At the time of writing, there have been almost 3000 Dapps developed
on Ethereum (https://www.stateofthedapps.com/stats, accessed on 15 March 2022). The
native currency is Ether (ETH). For privacy, Zero-Knowledge proof contracts can be used
to create private transactions. In order to avoid a high energy consumption by the proofof-work consensus mechanism, Ethereum is scheduled for an upgrade to proof-of-stake
mechanism in 2022.
3.3.3. Cardano
The project, dubbed “Ethereum Killer”, orders and validates transactions using the
Ouroboros protocol, a proof-of-stake consensus mechanism [102]. It employs a multilayered approach, with the settlement layer in charge of currency conversion and the
computation layer in charge of smart contract execution. As a result, the Cardano network may be easier to be upgraded compared to Bitcoin and Ethereum networks. For
transactions, the network employs the UTXO concept. It is capable of scaling up to
257 transaction per second. For privacy, Cardano implemented Zero-Knowledge proofs,
allowing private transactions. ADA is the network’s native currency, which is used to
incentivize validators. Cardano’s road to acceptance is still long, since the network currently has just 62 decentralised applications (dapps), which is too small compared to
Ethereum (https://cardanocrowd.com/dapps, accessed on 15 March 2022).

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

22 of 52

3.3.4. IOTA
Aimed at revolutionising the Internet of Things (IoT), IOTA [103] facilitates decentralised micro-payments between IoT devices. This network implements tangle, that is
based on the Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) data structure. There are no miners to validate
transactions in the IOTA network, instead, it deploys a fast probabilistic consensus mechanism. Each node. issuing a new transaction, must approve two previous transactions. In
the original design, IOTA also operates a coordinator node to achieve the consensus. It is
thus criticized as a centralized network. It also did not offer smart contracts due to lack of
absolute timestamp. Those issues were addressed in the IOTA’s newest version, launched
in April 2021. The system enables smart contracts by supporting EVM, all Solidity contracts
can thus be implemented on IOTA. The network is capable of around 1500 transactions
per second. Coin mixing is a technique used to conceal transactions. IOTA is the native
currency used for rewards and payments in the network.
3.3.5. Algorand
A public blockchain that employs a variation of the proof-of-stake consensus mechanism known as Pure proof-of-stake [104]. ALGO is the currency that is dispersed throughout the network’s validators. Payments-focused network capable of up to 1000 transactions
per second with a five second finality. The Algorand network is built on a tiered structure,
in which the first layer performs straightforward smart contracts pertaining to payments.
The second layer is responsible for the execution of sophisticated smart contracts. The
network was launched in 2019 and is funded by the Algorand Foundation, a non-profit
organisation. Algorand is also planning to expand into the permissioned space with their
enterprise blockchain platform.
3.3.6. Hyperledger Fabric
One of the most popular projects under the Hyperledger umbrella [22]. It is a permissioned distributed ledger that is well-suited for corporate use cases. Hyperledger Fabric
enables the creation of smart contracts in the form of chaincode. Its design is very modular
with many software components, minimizing the complexity of each component as well as
the overall module-dependency network. The network does not have its own currency, and
is able to perform approximately 3000 transactions per second. For privacy, Hyperledger
Fabric establishes consortiums amongst members through the use of channels. There is also
an option to have a private database contained within a node for the purpose of conducting
private data transactions.
3.3.7. R3 Corda
The brainchild of the R3 Foundation [105], permits the creation of a privacy-focused
permissioned blockchain in which organisations may deal directly with one another. This
enables parties to conduct private transactions over the network. Similar to Bitcoin, it
uses the UTXO concept for transactions. Additionally, legal contracts can be attached to
transactions. Corda uses Kotlin, a cross-platform programming language to implement
smart contracts. Due to the restriction on private transactions, throughput is limited to
between 15 and 1678 transactions per second, depending on the participant structure.
Corda implements two types of consensus mechanisms: transaction validity and transaction
uniqueness. While the former requires contractual validity of the transaction and all its
dependencies, the later prevents double-spends. In transaction validity, parties must
first verify the relevant contract code and present all needed signatures. Otherwise, in
transaction uniqueness, the parties must be assured that the transaction in issue is the
sole consumer of all specified input. This procedure entails ensuring that no subsequent
transaction consumes any of the agreed states.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

23 of 52

3.3.8. Quorum
Quorum [106,107] is a private and permissioned network built on top of an Ethereum.
It is based on the Go Ethereum client and utilises voting-based consensus. The unique
feature of Quorum is that it can classify transactions as private or public based on an
identity. As a result, the user initiating the transaction will have the option of making
it private or public. One of Quorum’s key goals is to maximise the usage of existing
technologies rather than reinventing the wheel. Due to the fact that it is a fork of Ethereum,
it supports EVM and smart contracts. Consensys bought Quorum from its original owner,
JPMorgan Chase, in 2020. Currently, the network supports around 900 transactions per
second, depending on configuration and setup.
3.3.9. Multichain
Mutlichain [23] is a Bitcoin core fork. It was created to facilitate the establishment of
both public and private blockchain networks. Multichain provides several configuration
options for configuring the network. Its primary purpose, as implied by its name, is to
link and interoperate with several chains. Multichain implements privacy using streams.
Participants can establish streams between themselves in order to share confidential data.
The performance may thus be affected by the network settings and the amount of streams
produced. Due to the fact that it is built on Bitcoin core, this protocol does not yet enable
smart contracts and the chain operates using the UTXO transaction paradigm. Roundrobin selection of validators for mining is used. During the initial setup process, custom
native assets can be developed. At the moment, the network has a throughput of roughly
1000 transactions per second.
3.3.10. Diem
Diem [108] is a private permissioned blockchain network that is established with a
small number of validators. DiemBFT is the consensus technique for validator election. The
network is controlled by an entity called Association, which operates as a central authority.
The Association account is primarily responsible for managing network memberships
and setup. Diem made a significant contribution with the Move smart contract language.
It contains several intrinsic safety attributes and tools that were created to facilitate the
creation of secure smart contracts from the start. The objective was to make payments
simple and flexible. Diem is the network’s native currency. Except for the fact that the
network is private, there are no intrinsic private transactions. According to a recent
performance measurement on the testnet, Diem had a throughput of roughly 3 transactions
per second, which is much slower than other blockchains. There has never been a mainnet
from Diem till today. The project was formerly held by Meta before being acquired by
Silvergate Capital (https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-01-31/meta-backeddiem-association-confirms-asset-sale-to-silvergate, accessed on 15 March 2022). As a result,
the project has been halted for an extended length of time with no updates.
4. Taxonomy of Use Cases
In this section, we will discuss the taxonomy of use cases in relation to fintech sectors
and blockchain-related advancements. While each of the fintech verticals is self-contained
inside its own domain, the use cases for blockchains are not, and they are having a ripple
effect on other sectors. These use cases can serve as building blocks for developing new
paradigms in financial services. We provide the Use cases alongside the fintech verticals
in Figure 9 and indicate how each Use case can be applied to several verticals. Utility can
refer to either technical architecture or commercial concepts. We expand on each of the use
cases below in detail in this section.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

24 of 52

Figure 9. Use case Categories and Mapping.

4.1. Digital Identity
Blockchain technology can be used to issue digital identity and credentials such as
birth certificates, driver licences, etc. in a secure and verifiable way. Indeed, in the simplest
identity model, the organization which provides services will issues a digital credential that
its users can use to access its service. This identity model requires a trust between user and
the organization, typically established through a password-based authentication. This is a
centralized and insecure approach to online interactions, and although multi-factor schemes
enhance the security, but they add friction that reduce user adoption and productivity.
Federated identity, or third-party identity provider (IDP) model adds a third-party
company or consortium to act as an “identity provider” (IDP) between users and the
organization. The approach provides a single sign-on method, reducing the number of
separate credentials users need to maintain. Although this identity model improves the
user experience, it raises privacy concerns, where the IDPs can track and spy users’ online
activities. The digital credentials issued by an IDP also could not be used in privacy-focused
industries, for example, a user can not use his Google credential to his banking service.
Blockchain-based digital identity, or self-sovereign identity (SSI), offers better privacy compared to the two above identity models. The self-sovereign identity community have worked on the validation of decentralized identity approaches to the critical
password-based authentication problem. This decentralized framework not only improves the user experience, but also the security and privacy of users. It is pointed out
in a Gartner’s report in 2021 [109] that decentralized identity can mitigate risk associated with centralized identity solutions that continue suffering from many data breaches.
Based on Hyperledger Indy [110], ATB Financial, Evernym, IBM, the Sovrin Foundation
and Workday have come together in a joint multi-phase effort to conceive and incubate
working examples of verifiable credentials (VC) for the purposes of awareness and education (https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2018/10/decentralized-identity-analternative-to-password-based-authentication/, accessed on 15 March 2022). In practice,
the European Union is creating an eIDAS compatible European Self-Sovereign Identity
Framework (ESSIF) [111]. The ESSIF is based on the concept of decentralized identifiers
(DIDs) and the European Blockchain Services Infrastructure (EBSI).
4.2. Payments
Payments, especially cross-border payments between individuals and SMEs in developing countries are facing high cost and long delays. Typically, each cross-border
transaction is conducted across a network of corresponding banks or money transfer
providers without a central clearing system. Transaction fees are high due to charges from
payor’s and payee’s institutions; inter-bank, cross-border transfer. There is a significant
amount of overhead and negotiation that is required to set up and facilitate transactions
across two legal jurisdictions that is partially solved if parties are willing to agree to use
decentralised platforms like Ethereum as an intermediary.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

25 of 52

One primary issue with payments in the public blockchain space is that transactions
are often, but not always entirely transparent with no privacy features. Typically there are
four ways in which privacy is provided in this area:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Use an inherently privacy-preserving cryptocurrency;
Atomically swap to a privacy-preserving cryptocurrency and transact there;
Use a mixing service;
Use an on-chain privacy token/service

Given that a privacy-preserving ledger is designed to hide information from the public,
atomically swapping to a privacy-preserving ledger is a non-trivial task. There are recent
examples of such atomic swaps but they are still nascent in their adoption. Mixing services
such as Coinjoin have a long history since before the DeFi space was well established but
many keen observers have realised that its privacy-preserving mechanism was much more
flawed than expected and do not provide the privacy-guarantees it was set out to achieve.
The current most popular approach of achieve privacy in payments is through privacy
enabling smart contracts such as Tornado Cash [112] which users exchange base currency
for a variable denomination token that represents the user’s claim on the Tornado Cash
reserves. The token exchange happens over a zero-knowledge protocol on the relevant
blockchain that closely follows and was inspired by ZCash’s design [113].
Apart from the privacy issues, using payments in decentralized context introduces a
new conceptual model. The traditional four-party payment model covers four main entities
involved in transactions, including: (i) the customer making a purchase; (ii) the issuer, who
holds the customer’s funds and has issued the payments instrument (typically card) being
used; (iii) the merchant accepting the payment; and (iv) the acquirer, the merchant’s bank,
who holds the merchant’s account, ensures that the merchant has the necessary facilities,
such as point-of-sale (POS) hardware, and initiates the processing of transactions.
Figure 10 depicts the main entities involved in the four-party payment model. In
practice, an online payment must include another party, so-called card scheme, e.g., Visa,
Mastercard, etc. The card scheme facilitates the communication between the acquirer and
the issuer. They pair up the card information received by the acquirer with the relevant
bank, enabling the acquirer to get the payment authorised.

Figure 10. Four Party Payment Model.

Different from the four-party model, transactions on the blockchain are analogous
to cash payments in that they are transmitted directly from payer to payee (Person-toPerson) without the need for an intermediary. This payment model when performed online
introduces the following advantages:
•
•

Reduce transaction fees
Faster transactions, especially transactions performed across different countries

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

26 of 52

•
•

Offer transparency and tractability
Indisputable and immutable after finality

4.3. Digital Currencies
The invention of digital currencies has brought about the pressure of innovation in
the fields of Banking, Payments, and Investments. To be considered a currency by the
definition in economics, it must meet the following requirements [114]: be a unit of account,
a medium of trade, and a store of wealth. Digital currencies are a form of money that are
expressed as a string of bits transmitted as a message via a network that validates the
message’s validity using a variety of processes. Four classes of digital currencies exist:
Cryptocurrencies, Stablecoins, Platform-based digital currencies(PBDC), and Central bank
digital currencies(CBDC). Each variety has distinct benefits and drawbacks. To begin,
cryptocurrencies are digital assets established on public and open blockchains that may be
utilized similarly to traditional currency. There is no central authority in charge of currency
supervision or regulation. The code is the law, and it establishes the laws governing the
money. There are around 15,000 cryptocurrencies in existence as of December 2021, with a
market valuation of $2.28 trillion USD [115]. The most well-known of these cryptocurrencies
are Bitcoin and Ethereum. Although they are decentralized, allowing the blockchain’s
capabilities, their price volatility and market changes as shown in Figure 11 earn them a
high level of public suspicion as a secure payment mechanism.
Stablecoins are an innovation that has emerged as a result of the aforementioned
concern. Stablecoins are digital currencies that are tied to other assets such as cryptocurrencies, fiat currency, or commodities traded on exchanges. Typically, each stablecoin is backed by a collateralized reserve asset. Various approaches might be used
to back stablecoins with other assets. As with Tether(USDT) [116], it might be a oneto-one mapping, where each USDT is backed by a genuine US dollar. As with Dai by
Maker [117], it might be collateralized by a basket of cryptocurrencies. As price stability
becomes an ever growing quality that investors seek out, some cryptocurrencies like Terra
have opted to research and engineer price stability mechanisms built into the protocol
inspired by government fiscal policy. Stablecoins have been compared to payment systems like as Venmo and Paypal [118]. The fees levied by these systems are significantly
greater than the transaction fees offered by certain networks, such as Binance Smart Chain
(BSC) [119]. Stablecoins can also be used as a bridge currency between cryptocurrency and
fiat economies. Stablecoins have been critical in providing liquidity for both domestic and
international payments. Stablecoins now have a market value of $183.37 billion USD as of
3 March 2022 (https://coincodex.com/cryptocurrencies/sector/stablecoins/, accessed on
15 March 2022).
Platform-based digital currencies (PBDCs) [120] are another type of currency that is
exclusive to certain internet platforms such as Meta [121] and Amazon [122]. There may
be a variety of defined procedures for users to acquire and trade this currency. These
mechanisms vary according to business models. They are not linked to or denominated in
national currencies. PBDC is a highly centralized with stringent restrictions on how the
currencies may be utilized. The platform retains control, and users are not permitted to
utilize these currencies outside of the platform.
Central bank digital currency (CBDC) is a digital version of a sovereign currency
issued by the monetary authority of a state [123]. CBDCs can be classified as Wholesale
CBDCs or Retail CBDCs [124]. Retail CBDC is a digital version of currency that is mostly
utilized for personal and consumer transactions. Retail CBDC may improve user access
and usability, lower the cost of e-commerce and cross-border payments. CBDC wholesale
is a new infrastructure for inter-bank settlements, such as payments between banks and
other companies with a direct link with the central bank. CBDC on a wholesale basis
can help enhance inter-bank payment settlement, as well as mitigate the risks and costs
associated with cross-border payment transactions. The design of CBDC should consider
the following non-exhaustive key characteristics [125]: privacy, resilience, universal access

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

27 of 52

and security. It could support and credibly instill confidence in a thriving and competitive
digital economy in a way private platforms may not be able; presenting a new compelling
option. Since 2016, many central banks have been doing research in order to develop
an effective CBDC prototype [124]. The state of efforts on designing CBDCs throughout
the world is depicted in Figure 12. Not every effort is directed towards blockchain-based
CBDCs. With its e-CNY initiative, the People’s Bank of China is putting CBDC to the
test [126]. The e-CNY is a prototype initiative that is being implemented in 10 regions
around China. It was presented in February 2022 at the Olympic Games sites in Beijing and
Zhangjiakou. An additional CBDC effort worth highlighting is Project Hamilton [127]. It is
a digital currency initiative initiated by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Media
Lab in partnership with the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston to construct a hypothetical
CBDC (https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/cbdctracker/, accessed on 3 March 2022).

Figure 11. Bitcoin Price and Volatility (https://www.buybitcoinworldwide.com/volatility-index/,
accessed on 3 March 2022).

Figure 12. CBDC Tracker.

4.4. Investing
4.4.1. Decentralised Exchanges
A critical challenge that cryptocurrencies faced early on was the issue of centralised
exchanges. Many pointed out and rightly criticized that how could the technology which
constantly touted its decentralisation could be truly called as such if it relied on centralised

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

28 of 52

entities in order to purchase and sell. Thus many open discussions were held to solicit
ideas from the community on how to build decentralised exchanges (DEXs). Overtime,
it became abundantly clear that the issue was non-trivial. Some of the first iterations of
DEXs resembled a mere replication of the traditional order book model [128] that most
people who have a investment account would be familiar with. There would be two sides
of the order book, a collection of bids of buyers willing to purchase a set amount at a set
price, and a collection of asks of sellers willing to sell a set amount at a set price. An order
would go through if either a buy or seller were willing to take the price set by the bids and
asks. However, given the nature of transaction creation in the blockchain space, pending
transactions would be totally transparent and be open to frontrunning, a typically illegal
trading strategy that involves in exploiting and scalping the market to raise or decrease
prices in the scalper’s favour to the disadvantage of an honest buyer or seller.
Since it became clear that market makers would take advantage of this attribute
of blockchains, an automated market making (AMM) mechanism [129] was introduced
so that the decentralised exchange would be working with arbitrageurs to bring correct
prices and benefits to the transacting parties rather than working against them. The first
proposal for such a mechanism was called the constant product mechanism [130] which
spawned numerous derivatives that are common place in liquidity pool and DEXs today.
Uniswap [131], Sushiswap [132] and Balancer [133] are the three well-known protocols in
the DEX ecosystem.
4.4.2. Decentralised Finance
Current consumers in the conventional financial ecosystem are unaware of the majority
of accessible products and are unfamiliar with the laws governing these assets. Decentralized Finance (DeFi), often known as the lego of finance, provides the end user with
the transparency, control, and accessibility that centralized finance lacks. Asset exchanges,
loans, leveraged trading, decentralized governance, stablecoins, options, and derivatives
are just a few of the items that fall under the DeFi umbrella. The previous subsection’s
discussion of decentralized exchanges falls within the DeFi taxonomy as well. Figure 13
illustrates the DeFi services and the market mechanisms introduced due to the underlying
distributed database. We have already covered the concepts of Stablecoins and Decentralized Exchanges in the previous subsections. Below we define few other notable products
under DeFi:

Figure 13. High-level DeFi Components [134].

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

29 of 52

Protocols for Loanable Funds (PLFs) Protocol Loanable Funds (PLFs) or Lending
/Borrowing Protocols can be used to describe the way deposited funds in smart
contracts are pooled and made accessible on distributed-ledger marketplaces for
lending and borrowing. These PLFs can be further classified into over-collateralized
loans and flash loans [135]. Over-collateralized loans in which collateral is needed
to get a loan on an asset. The catch being the collateral is worth more than the loan
itself. To compensate for the volatility of assets, the added value is often employed.
In contrast, there is no collateral required for a flash loan. Flash loans [136] are those
in which the loan is initiated to help bootstrap a chain of transactions that ensures
repayment by the borrower in an atomic bundle of transactions. Compound [137],
Aave [138], and dYdX [139] are three well-known protocols in the PLF market. Four
factors differentiate these three protocols [140]: interest rate model, interest disbursement, governance token and the amount interest deducted to be place in reserve. The
reserve component is there to be used during times of illiquidity.
Derivatives DeFi derivatives are smart contract-based services. Essentially, these are financial contracts that generate revenue dependent on the performance of the underlying
assets. Assets may contain a combination of bonds, currencies, and interest rates.
Synthetix [141], Nexus Mutual [142], and Erasure [143] are all popular protocols in
the derivatives market. As of February 2021, the crypto derivatives market makes up
for 57% of monthly volume [144].
4.5. Infrastructure/Value-Add Services
4.5.1. Decentralized Oracles
Blockchain networks are like closed circuits. All the data that smart contracts can be
associated with is located and maintained by the nodes of the network. There is no way
in-built into the protocol, as to how smart contracts can interact with external data as part
of certain computations. Oracles are entities external to a blockchain network that can
pipe information into the network as shown in Figure 14. The information can be relied
upon based on the proofs submitted along with the data. Oracles have been classified
based on different factors [145–147]: infrastructure architecture, data source, purpose of the
oracle and based on design patterns. Depending on the choice of the oracle type, multiple
protocols have been proposed [148–156].

Figure 14. Blockchain and Oracles.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

30 of 52

The induction of decentralization into Fintech space will bring in lot of dependencies
on the existing legacy infrastructure. With the limitation of connectivity to external systems
in blockchain, oracles will definitely play a key role. A secure, dependent, inexpensive and
decentralized protocol for an oracle will become a basic need for this community.
4.5.2. Decentralized Storage
The internet generates massive amounts of data that is then served to the users from
all over the world using multitude of services like cloud storage, peer-to-peer networks,
intranet servers etc. When it comes to storage and retrieval of financial data it is crucial to
maintain security, latency and availability at all times. Reliance on a centralized system
will always have a backdoor through which an adversary can easily access and manipulate
the data. Another evident issue with cloud storage is the concentration of few technology
companies that have the capacity to build massive data centers. Due to this restriction, the
cost around storage within these known servers increases with the space and availability
requirements. Recently, with the inclusion of General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
restrictions in some countries, the regulations around how and where to store the data
are also changed. Data privacy is becoming a basic intuition needed when thinking about
storage services.
Decentralized storage [157–159] is an option that can overcome the above mentioned
constraints and is gaining momentum with the influx of blockchain use-cases. This enables
trustless storage and allows for splitting the data and replicating the data across the world
along multiple servers. These servers could be like a standalone user machine that is
connected over a network with some pre-allocated hard disk space. The control of the
data is not with the service provider anymore, rather with the user itself. Based on the
persistence or incentive mechanisms used for data, different storage solutions have been
proposed [160–166]. Below we present three popular storage systems on a high-level:
Filecoin: Filecoin [167] was created in 2017 by Protocol Labs, the team responsible for the
InterPlanetary File System’s inception (IPFS). IPFS is a decentralized peer-to-peer
file system that enables the storage and distribution of data between peers. Filecoin
is positioned on top of IPFS. It makes use of IPFS for storage. Filecoin’s consensus
process is known as Proof of storage. Consensus consists of two components: proof of
replication, which requires miners to establish that they are storing legitimate data;
and proof of space time, which requires miners to demonstrate that they are storing
valid data for over certain period. The other component is evidence for the existence
of space and time. The miners in this example exhibit the data’s durability. They
demonstrate how long they have been storing the data in this stage. Miners are
compensated with FIL coins for storing data and mining proofs in the network. When
saving data, there is no built-in encryption technique. Additionally, unlike other
storage technologies, the data are not fragmented among different nodes. The files
are stored on a single IPFS backend node as entire units. In 2020, Filecoin launched
their mainnet.
Storj: Storj [164] is a decentralised cloud storage platform that was founded in 2014 leveraging Bitcoin. In 2017, Storj moved to Ethereum. Storj is currently on version V3, which
was introduced in 2019. The Storj network is made up of three primary components:
Storage Nodes—Servers that offer the ability to rent out extra hard drive capacity.
Uplinks—Clients install the service on their PCs and use it to securely upload and
download data. Satellites—Traffic mediators between uplinks and storage nodes.
They segment and stripe the data for storage on the nodes. Additionally, the data may
be copied across numerous nodes. Occasionally, if the data are too small, the satellites
will store the data segments themselves. To retrieve and see data, clients must give
the private key used to create the data upload. STORJ is the network’s preferred
method of payment. Users are rewarded for paying in STORJ since it enables them to
get payment. The total quantity of STORJ tokens is 500 million.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

31 of 52

Sia: Sia [161,168] is a cloud storage company that operates on a decentralised model. Its
architecture is comprised of several components and roles. On a high-level, storage
providers and hosts in the Sia network engage into a Sia File contract with storage
renters. The contract may include expiration and other stipulations. Hosts are
responsible for storing data and submitting evidence of storage to the blockchain
on a regular basis. The data are distributed in fragments across different nodes on
the network to increase reliability. Hosts need to buy in the storage, this allows for
penalizing the hosts when they go offline. Compared to Storj, Sia has limited number
of nodes. The blockchain stores only proofs. The hosts maintain the real data. Renters
can validate the data’s veracity using the proofs. Renters pay the hosts for the storage
service, depending on the payment option chosen. Apart from the storage network,
Sia just released Skynet, a layer 2 solution. Skynet operates as an application layer,
allowing for the deployment of decentralised applications that interface with Sia
storage. Siacoin is the token used in this network for rewards and payments.
4.5.3. Node-as-a-Service
In the Fintech ecosystem, even in centralized infrastructure settings, cloud service
providers such as Amazon, Azure, or Google are relied upon. They generally do not host
servers on their own, as this entails a significant amount of engineering effort in terms of
upkeep. In the blockchain scenario, the network is composed of several types of nodes
based on the server’s capability. The majority of procedures fall into one of three categories:
Archive Node—A node that maintains a history of data on the blockchain dating all the way
back to the network’s genesis block. Full Node—A node that may purge data on a periodic
basis and rely on the Archive node to verify the legacy data. Light Node—A client-facing
node that does not store data but communicates with the Full Node to calculate and deliver
blocks to the Full Node for storage. Light nodes keep extremely low data due to the fact
that their infrastructure may consist of devices such as mobile phones. The user interface
of any network of decentralized apps will communicate with the nodes to obtain data from
the blockchain. Depending on the storage capacity, experience, and level of control required
for the application, clients can either self-host or use a node-as-a-service (NaaS) provider. By
utilizing a NaaS service, the duty for maintaining the node is eliminated. The client is not
concerned about storage, bandwidth, or technical effort. Although customers of this type
of service must never reveal their private keys. Users can interact with their data using an
API given by the NaaS provider. Numerous services have existed since the concept of NaaS
was born. Alchemy [169], Ankr [170], BlockDaemon [171], and Chainstack [172] are just a
few of the most well-known applications in this domain. They offer a variety of service
kinds depending on their business models.
4.6. Online Marketplaces and Supply Chains
4.6.1. Online Marketplaces
Historically, markets had four objectives: Match-making—the process of connecting
buyers and sellers; transaction settlement—depending on the goods or services exchanged
between a buyer and seller, settlement may include payment or the exchange of another
good or service; service delivery—the end result of a transaction settlement is the delivery
of the product to the buyer; and dispute resolution—the crux of marketplaces is to provide
a mechanism for resolving disputes between buyers and sellers. Since the dawn of the
internet, centralized marketplaces have existed. The majority of these businesses rely on
reputation as their trust mechanism, which presents a significant barrier to entry for new
merchants or consumers. Additionally, there are several middlemen who exert influence
over the marketplaces and operate in the system’s favor. An example of this, is when an
intermediary constantly connects with the highest bidding seller in order to benefit from
the deal. Client privacy is not maintained in the centralized scenario as information is with
a central entity. Payments could become a problem as well when interacting with sellers
and buyers across border. Finally, there is the issue of terminating the marketplace, which

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

32 of 52

is not difficult to do when everything is controlled by a small number of intermediaries.
Figure 15 lists the major differences between centralized and decentralized marketplaces.
Decentralized marketplaces are another intriguing application of blockchain technology.
Figure 16 depicts a prototype architecture and the players that can engage in each of
the marketplace’s fundamental operations. The usage of smart contracts in this design
highlights how each function may be decentralized and facilitated by blockchain technology.
Additionally, the network as a whole is not controlled by a single intermediary. A simple
example for blockchain based marketplace is where a seller uploads the good information
on to a smart contract and a buyer will have transparent interaction as to the purchase
using the data shown and the infrastructure itself can be used for payments.

Figure 15. Marketplace Comparison [173].

Figure 16. Roles and Functionalities of a Decentralized Marketplace [174].

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

33 of 52

Different sorts of marketplaces exist. There are two notable use cases for marketplaces
in terms of decentralized options:
Prediction Marketplaces This is a fascinating application of markets. This is a market for
the purchase and sale of future contracts on binary events. They are often arranged
so that they charge between $0 and $1 depending on the result of an event. Both good
and bad consequences can be bought into by participants. Additionally, blockchain
has several benefits in this circumstance. The first is opposition to censorship. There
is no regulation that could be instituted by organizations. The other significant
advantage is that it is accessible to individuals. Anybody may create a market and
participate as a buyer or vendor. Oracles, as described previously, serve a critical
role in linking the marketplace to the conclusion of non-blockchain events. In this
example, Augur [154] and Gnosis [175] are two major initiatives.
Data Marketplaces The current generation is based on the exchange of massive volumes
of data. This interaction might take place between individuals, between individuals
and devices, or between devices and devices. A decentralized data marketplace may
foster openness, integrity, and privacy, all of which are critical in this circumstance.
Numerous prototypes [176–178] for data marketplaces are being developed, the
majority of which will include Internet of Things (IoT) devices.
4.6.2. Supply Chain Finance
The 2008 global financial crisis exposed numerous vulnerabilities in supply chains
and associated capital management. During this time period, interest in Supply Chain
Finance (SCF) began to grow. SCF [179] is the process of optimizing financial structures
and processes within the supply chain ecosystem. The optimization process is primarily
concerned with managing the working capital and liquidity associated with corporate
institutions’ supply chain procedures. The basic flow of SCF is depicted in Figure 17, along
with the parties involved. SCF enables risk management by facilitating the management of
cash flows between customers, suppliers, and service providers.
As illustrated in Figure 17, there is a high degree of reliance on intermediates such as
SCP Platform and lead financial institutions. This is where the application of blockchain
technology becomes apparent. The incorporation of Blockchain technology into the SCF
workflow benefits significantly in two ways [180,181]: it eliminates information asymmetry
and enables traceable and tamper-proof systems to detect irregularities and anti-counterfeit
challenges. Without the requirement for an intermediary, all components such as cash
flows, information flows, payment exchanges, and invoice exchanges can be enabled on
blockchain. Table 5 summarizes several well-known ventures, their underlying platform,
and some of the specifics of their objectives, business strategies, and participants.

Figure 17. Workflow of SCF.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

34 of 52

Table 5. A Summary of SCF Blockchain companies.

Company
Contour [182]

Platform
R3 Corda

Skuchain [183]

Hyperledger Fabric

eTradeConnect [184]

Hyperledger Fabric

komgo [185]

Quorum blockchain

Marco Polo [186]

R3 Corda

UAE Trade
nect [187]

Hyperledger Fabric

We.trade [188]

Con-

Hyperledger Fabric

Summary
Rebranded from Voltron, targetted towards letters of credit usecase.
Revenue model will include monthly subscription fees and transaction fees in the platform. Participants in the network currently
include: Bangkok Bank, BNP Paribas, CTBC, Citi, ING, HSBC, SEB,
and Standard Chartered.
Provides end-to-end solution for supply chain finance and not restricted to a particular usecase. Firms pay subscription and transaction fees for using the platform. Currently, the platform is operating
across countries including USA, Asia, Europe etc., It is fully interoperable with Corda and Ethereum.
Operated by the Hong Kong Trade Finance Platform Company Limited. Offers multiple products for SCF including purchase order
and invoice creation, pre-shipment trade finance and post-shipment
trade finance. Current participants include various banks from Australia, Hong Kong and Asia.
Around 150 companies are using this platform. Along with SCF
solutions this platform also offers Know-Your-Customer(KYC) and
certification feature. They generate revenue through subscription
fees and professional services charges for activities like integration.
Is a network for SCF consisting of over 30 banks globally. The
platform is compatible with APIs and legacy systems allowing banks
to easily integrate. Marco Polo operates following a license and
transaction fee model.
8 banks participated in the product launch. UAE Trade Connect
addresses several of the issues with duplicate and fraudulent invoice financing that have posed considerable problems to banks in
the industry.It will generate revenue by charging banks for each
transaction that they verify.
Through a license fee and transaction fee model, we.trade currently
has a number of products that are live, including: Auto-Settlement:
automation of payment based on pre-agreed conditions; Bank Payment Undertaking (BPU): confirmation of buyer’s bank to make a
payment to the seller; BPU Financing: a financing option for the
seller based on the BPU; and Invoice Financing: a financing option
for the seller based on a single sales invoice.

4.7. Corporate Governance
Corporate governance [189,190] is primarily concerned with the administration of an
organization’s economic and social objectives. Engagement of stakeholders is critical in this
scenario. Although corporate governance has existed for a long period of time, it continues
to face numerous fundamental issues. To begin, businesses can profit from short-term
fluctuations in share prices and accounting methods. Several instances include violations
of ethics, lack of openness, and conflicts of interest. For shareholders, issues arise around
accountability and ownership transfer, which are frequently associated with expensive costs.
In terms of decision-making, present procedures rely heavily on manual processes, making
it easier for actors to be persuaded and collude in order to commit systemic malpractices.
This is where blockchain enters the fray. Blockchain has completely transformed the field
of governance. Multiple governance mechanisms have been established at various levels of
the blockchain architecture, which enables corporate governance structures to be executed
on these platforms. As indicated in Figure 18, governance can be achieved at the application
level through the use of smart contracts and at the protocol level through the use of access
control. We have discussed in detail the access control techniques at the protocol level in

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

35 of 52

Section 1.2 and some of the platforms that implement these mechanisms in Section 3.3 under
classification of blockchain platforms. Below we cover on the application level options.

Figure 18. Blockchain and Governance.

Initial Coin Offerings (ICOs): Initial coin offerings (ICOs) are a method of issuing assets
on the blockchain as tokens. These assets can be used to raise funds from investors
or to distribute shares among an organization’s stakeholders and management. The
initial coin offering (ICO) was created as a decentralized alternative to the first public
offering (IPO). Table 6 summarizes a number of the analogies that may be made
between ICOs and initial public offerings. Due to the intrinsic advantages allowed
by the usage of the blockchain layer, ICOs primarily facilitate more transparency
in terms of ownership and real-time accounting.ICO tokens can be classified into
multiple types which include the following: Security tokens—Tokens that represent
an organization’s shares and are issued as an investment vehicle. They are regulated
similarly to conventional securities. Utility tokens—Rather than ownership in the
organization, these tokens provide owners with preferential treatment and access to
certain specified items. The goods could be software packages or a platform for software as a service. Payment tokens—These are intrinsically valuable tokens, comparable
to cash, that can be used to purchase and sell goods and services. Figure 19 illustrates a few initiatives for each type of token (https://medium.com/swlh/types-oftokens-the-four-mistakes-beginner-crypto-investors-make-a76b53be5406, accessed
on 3 March 2022).
Table 6. IPO vs. ICO [191].
Legal status
Securities type

Risk level
Accessibility
Costs

IPO
Detailed regulation
Stocks and bonds

Moderate
For large enterprises, For investors
High

ICO
No regulation or insufficient one
Tokens that may have features of particular types of
securities or being vouchers or having no additional
attributes at all
High (for the company and investors)
May be used by almost any company. Anyone who have
internet access can become an investor
Moderate or low

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

36 of 52

Figure 19. Types of Tokens.

Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs): DAOs [192,193], which were first
proposed in 2016, are governance structures that can incorporate not only mechanisms for participant financing maintenance, but also code-formulated and automated governance rules into the system via software code. One of the primary uses
of smart contracts is to enable the implementation of DAOs. By utilizing their tokens,
investors and shareholders can participate in significant decisions. Additionally, these
decision-making procedures can be achieved through the use of voting or auction
systems. DAOs can be configured to provide a variety of functionalities, depending
on the business model of the organization. A word that is often used in conjunction
with DAOs is Decentralized Autonomous Corporation (DAC) [99], which is used
to refer to corporate governance. While DAOs are more akin to public blockchain
scenarios, DACs are more akin to shareholder dividends. With the growing interest
in DAOs, a trend known as DAO as a service has emerged. These systems enable the
automated construction of DAOs on blockchains with customized functionality. Users
that lack the necessary skills or experience in terms of smart contract development
can use these platforms to immediately construct their own DAOs. They can create
DAOs by modifying existing DAOs. Aragon [194], DAOStack [195], and Colony [196]
are the primary platforms in this. The following Table 7 summarizes a few high-level
details about these initiatives.
Table 7. Comparison between DAOs.

Platform
Aragon

Launch
Oct 2018

DAOs Token
1700 ANT

Market Cap
$ 3 billion USD

Features
•
•
•

DAOStack Apr 2019

Colony

Jan 2022

22

-

GEN

CLNY

•

Tool to create and participate in DAOs
Large network of DAOs
Non
profit
organization
to
distribute
network tokens
A system to resolve disputes

•
•
•
•
•

Holographic consensus mechanism
Asset management services
Modular smart contract framework
Javascript development environment
Friendly user interface

•
•
•
•
•

Mainnet launched very recently
Reputation mechanism
Token creation and distribution
Gasless transactions
Lazy consensus

$ 1.6 million USD

-

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

37 of 52

4.8. Crowdfunding
Crowdfunding is another area in which substantial sums of money are transferred. In general, crowdfunding [197] is the process through which an individual, a group of individuals,
or an organization solicits cash for a specific cause via an internet platform. Michael Sullivan
coined the word crowdsourcing for his fundavlog project (https://socialmediaweek.org/
blog/2011/12/a-social-history-of-crowdfunding/, accessed on 25 February 2022). Globally,
crowdsourcing generated approximately $5.5 billion USD in 2017 and $10.2 billion USD in 2018.
According to the Global Crowdfunding market study 2022 (https://www.marketwatch.com/
press-release/crowdfunding-market-by-growth-opportunities-2022---top-key-players-analysisby-demand-status-industry-size-and-share-forecast-with-covid-19-impact-analysis-on-regionaltrends-2024-2022-03-07), accessed on 25 February 2022, it is predicted to grow at a continuous
rate of 18 percent, reaching $124.85 billion USD in revenue. According to the report, a
significant driver is the rising use of social media platforms for free fund raising efforts and
the increased accessibility to cash enabled by technological innovations such as blockchain.
Numerous market models [198] have been employed throughout crowdfunding’s history.
Certain models are investment vehicles, which implies that investors can anticipate receiving a portion of the earnings generated. Other models include non-investing, which
refers to non-profit endeavours that cannot be anticipated to generate a profit for investors.
The four most often used business models in crowdfunding are as follows: Lending-based
Crowdfunding—This funding strategy entails lenders and borrowers as participants. They
can communicate directly with one another, eliminating the need for an intermediary. This
is an investing model in which the lenders’ loans will be repaid. LendingClub [199] is a
good illustration of this strategy. Donation-based Crowdfunding—This is a non-investment
paradigm in which individuals can raise money for a cause by using online platforms.
Individuals interested in assisting social initiatives can use GoFundMe [200] to create a
crowdfunding request and raise funds. Equity-based Crowdfunding—Intended mostly for
small businesses and start-ups willing to distribute a portion of their ownership to investors
as equity. AngelList [201] is an illustration of this model. A non-profit organization that
connects entrepreneurs and angel investors. Finally, Reward-based Crowdfunding is a viable
option. As the name implies, the platform will provide some type of compensation in
exchange for the funds. The benefits may be proportional to the amount contributed: the
more the contribution, the greater the reward. Kickstarter [202] is a fine example of this
model. Individuals that contribute to a project can be set up to get rewards at multiple tiers,
and the project creator can choose the reward model.
Traditional crowdfunding sites charge a fee for connecting fundraisers with investors
or donors. These platforms operate as intermediates, and due to the centralized control,
numerous scams are possible. In 2005, amid Hurricane Katrina’s aftermath, more than
2400 malicious websites defrauded donors of millions of dollars [203]. To avoid these types
of scams and ensure the crowdfunding process is conducted transparently, blockchain
technology can be used as the technology provider. There is no middleman, and the platform is entirely governed by code. Anti-fraud, anti-tampering, and a decentralized ledger
system are all characteristics that would be incorporated [204]. Additionally, the platform
can connect worldwide players regardless of the underlying local currency. There are 181
cryptocurrency-based crowdfunders worldwide (https://tracxn.com/d/trending-themes/
Startups-in-Crypto-Crowdfunding, accessed on 3 March 2022). Table 8 summarizes the top
five projects.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

38 of 52

Table 8. Top 5 Blockchain Crowdfunding Platforms.

Name
RealBlocks [205]

Launch Year
2015

Meridio [206]

2017

QuantmRE [207]

2017

Gitcoin [208]

2017

Brickblock [209]

2016

RealtyBits [210]

2018

Summary
RealBlocks is a decentralized platform built on distributed ledger
technology which enables retail and institutional investors to invest
in real estate projects. Tokenizes the physical assets and thus allows
retail investors to own a part of the project.
Meridio is an online crowdfunding platform for real estate investments. The SaaS solution uses blockchain based technology to convert individual properties into digital shares. Investors can directly
connect with landlords by circumventing all traditional intermediaries and co-own properties. The company claims to verify all
investors and properties registered on the platform.
QuantmRE is an online crowdfunding platform based on blockchain
technology. It enables property owners/investors to create a portfolio of assets, receive investments from other investors, and more.
It enables homeowners to gain additional value of their homes by
enabling others to invest in it. Investors can purchase tokens to begin
the process.
On-demand requirement for open source software development.
Features of gitcoin are fund issues, tip developers, project search,
gith hub integrations, and hackathons. It allows freelancers to work
on Python, Rust, Ruby, JavaScript, Solidity, HTML, CSS, and Design.
Brickblock claims to be creating an investment platform that allows individuals to invest directly into ETFs and real estate funds
using their cryptocurrency balances. The goal of the project is to
create a system that facilitates cross-border investments and access
to capital markets round the clock. Enabled by smart contracts, the
platform will allow routine dispersion of dividends, reduce entry
barriers in terms of paperwork and foreign exchange, and function
relatively transparently.
It is one of the decentralized crowdfunding platforms that allow
investing in American commercial real estate. Real estate investment
funds are raised via verified investors. It uses RBX tokens to raise its
fund and make investments.

5. Open Research Challenges
Until now, we have talked about the benefits, advantages, and many use cases that
can arise from the properties of blockchain. Despite this, the blockchain/DLT ecosystem
still faces a number of outstanding research topics and problems. With the proliferation of
applications in both the public and private sectors, these issues are only going to becoming
more difficult to solve. Scalability, security, and decentralization were the three pillars of
the Blockchain Trilemma [211,212] when it was first proposed. The blockchain trilemma
basically argues that we must make trade-offs while choosing one of the three primary
aspects of blockchain. However, with the expansion of use cases, we can now add other
categories to this framework and no longer have a Trilemma. These concerns can be broken
down into a number of categories, as shown in Figure 20. All of these topics are covered in
depth in this section.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

39 of 52

Figure 20. Challenges in Blockchain/DLT ecosystem.

5.1. Scalability
Scalability [213,214] is a primary objective when involving Fintech. The network must
be scalable and self-sustaining in terms of transaction volume. Visa currently processes
approximately 1700 transactions per second. In comparison, Bitcoin and Ethereum currently
handle 7 and 15 transactions per second, respectively. This is the polar opposite of what the
existing financial system requires. According to the architecture of the blockchain platform,
we can evaluate scalability limitations at several levels, as seen in Figure 21.

Figure 21. Open Research in Scalability.

To begin, we shall consider protocol-level difficulties. Because the block size is currently limited, if the network experiences an increase in transactions, either the block
generation rate (which is determined by the consensus method) or the block size must be
increased. Increasing the block size incurs additional processing node overhead and is
dependent on network bandwidth. In any situation, the chain size would grow in lockstep
with the number of transactions in the network, increasing the required storage capacity
on the node. On the other hand, decreasing the block size results in more forks as blocks
are generated more quickly. The other constraint is latency. Latency is the time difference
between the input and output; a short latency is always preferred. For example, due
to the consensus constraints imposed by bitcoin, it takes at least six blocks to confirm a
transaction, which means it has been accepted by all miners and is on the longest chain.
This will obstruct network scalability once more.
Increasing the number of nodes at the infrastructure level, as in centralized networks,
is not a possibility. Increasing nodes stabilizes performance for POW mechanisms, but
degrades performance for BFT mechanisms. In terms of chain size, bitcoin now requires

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

40 of 52

more than 100 GB of storage and this will continue to grow over time. Miners and validators
must have access to this type of storage capacity. They must take into account the network
speed in order to process gossip-protocols efficiently.
Finally, at the application level, depending on the frameworks used for the user
interface, requests from the front-end must be managed in such a way that the program
does not become unresponsive as the number of requests grows. For managing incoming
data requests, multiple load balancing approaches should be considered. The second
concern is nodes’ reliance on off-chain computation. If nodes in the network are unable to
do sophisticated computations, reliance on off-chain data rises, potentially increasing delay.
Several open research questions (ORQ) in this functional area include the following:
ORQ1: How should we design scalable protocols from the ground up when developing a
blockchain-based financial services platform?
ORQ2: Which characteristics (block size, network size, etc.) should be used to ensure that
a network maintains consistent throughput and latency?
ORQ3: What is the optimal throughput and latency required for a financial application to
run on blockchain?
ORQ4: How much centralization should be permitted (if scalability is increased) while
using blockchain in enterprise scenarios?
ORQ5: On which layer of the architecture should we place a premium on scalability? Is it
Layer 1 (at the protocol-level) or Layer 2?
ORQ6: Is reliance on multi-layered architectures a disadvantage, or is it more beneficial
for the community to host a variety of applications?
5.2. Interoperability
With the proliferation of blockchain platforms and the variety of implementations
inside these platforms, there is still a communication gap between them. Many of these
platforms are application-specific, which contributes to the communication difficulty. Interoperability refers to a platform’s capacity to communicate and exchange data with
other platforms. As a result, the interoperability challenges can also be mapped as a
trilemma [215], as illustrated in Figure 22. A trade-off must be made between the three
variables—trustlessness, extensibility, and generalizability—to determine which two qualities are crucial for the network. The term trustlessness relates to ensuring that the underlying
domains keep the same level of security. Extensibility is a term that refers to the capacity to
accommodate numerous domains. The capacity to support cross-domain applications is
referred to as generalizability.

Figure 22. Interoperability Trilemma.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

41 of 52

The following are some of the open research questions (ORQ) in this field. ORQ1–ORQ4
are questions about communication between platforms with varying degrees of trust.
ORQ5 and ORQ6 address platform-specific concerns. ORQ7–ORQ9 raise concerns about
accessibility and usability.
ORQ1: How do we transfer data between platforms while maintaining an identical level
of privacy and security?
ORQ2: How can we ensure that data are valid across platforms?
ORQ3: What safeguards and protocols should be used when communicating between
public and private/consortium blockchains?
ORQ4: What are the dangers associated with implementing interoperability between
platforms with varying degrees of trust?
ORQ5: If the platform is application-specific, for example, supply chain blockchain, how
do you transfer data in a way that other platforms can interpret it?
ORQ6: Using financial services as an example, how do you model the value of assets
across numerous platforms?
ORQ7: From a programming standpoint, how can we execute a smart contract developed
for one platform on another?
ORQ8: How can developers compete in terms of becoming familiar with the semantics of
many platforms that use different languages?
ORQ9: In terms of usability and accessibility, is the end-user experience consistent
across platforms?
5.3. Security
As any computer system, blockchain systems, built on distributed networks could be
vulnerable to cyber-attacks. As shown in Figure 23, security threats to a blockchain could
be classified in the three following groups:
1.

Threats to protocols: A security breach in this group would impact the system integrity. Depending on protocols that drive system and network behaviors, hackers
could be able to fork the blockchain, perform unauthorized transactions, doublespending, violate the privacy, etc. Threat targets include the following:
•

•

•

Consensus mechanisms: The integrity of an blockchain relies on the assumption
that the majority of miners are honest in mining and in maintaining the network.
In the proof-of-work (PoW), if there is a chance that the majority of the miners are
colluding together, these miners would be capable of compromising the integrity
of the transactions. An successful attack against consensus mechanism provably
the most harmful to the system. The study of effective and secure consensus
mechanisms is still a open problem.
Cryptographic algorithms: While blockchain can provide the tamper-proof of
transactions due to the use of cryptographic hash functions, attackers are still
able to exploit other vulnerabilities. A collision in the hash functions could allow
a malicious adversary to replace or modify the input data without changing
its digest. A signature forgery could lead to unauthorized transactions. A
security breach in other asymmetric cryptographic algorithms, such as ring
signatures, zero-knowledge proofs or homomorphic commitment will result
in loosing confidentiality and privacy. Last but not least, practical quantum
computers would break all cryptosystems based on integer factorization and
discrete-logarithm.
Smart contracts: Since smart contracts are encoded as a part of a “creation”
transaction, and written on the blockchain, it is difficult to update. In case a
vulnerability is exploited in a smart contract, a malicious adversary could gain
profit without respecting agreements between related parties.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

42 of 52

•

2.

3.

Virtual machine: As this platform provides an execution environment for smart
contracts, vulnerabilities exploited also allow a malicious adversary to gain profit
without an agreement from related parties in the smart contracts.

Threats to networks: Various kind of attacks against networking services exist. For
instance, Ethereum suffered a DoS attack in 2016 (https://blog.ethereum.org/2016/0
9/22/ethereum-network-currently-undergoing-dos-attack/, accessed on 2 February
2022). In Dos attacks, an attacker will flush data to a node. This may make the
node cannot process normal transactions, that is, aims at the availability of a system.
Other network attacks could be carried out on the node routing table or note identity.
Designing and provisioning a secure blockchain-based Fintech system against network
attacks is crucial.
Threats to data on the blockchain: Users’ addresses, data transactions, digital wallets, smart contracts, etc. are visible to all participants on the blockchain system
to some extent. A blockchain-based system must provide security features to the
data, including its integrity, confidentiality and availability. Loosing private key is a
significant security concern of participants on the blockchain as without his private
key, a participant will have no longer control on his digital assets on the blockchain.
Loosing could be caused by a carelessness or by a compromised device holding the
digital wallet. How could we design a user-friendly, but digital wallet?

Figure 23. Security Threats to Blockchain Systems.

The following are some of the open research questions (ORQ) for the security in
blockchain systems. While the first two questions are related to public blockchains, the last
three questions are for private blockchains.
ORQ1: How can a public blockchain network detect false network identities to prevent
Sybil attacks?
ORQ2: How can a public blockchain network provide the confidentiality of blockchain’s data?
ORQ3: How do we provide the same level of security in a private blockchain compared to
the public blockchain networks with a higher level of decentralization?
ORQ4: How does a private blockchain network provide a secure access control?
ORQ5: How can we prevent double-spending in private blockchains, where transactions
are not publicly verified?
5.4. Privacy
The term privacy refers to the fact that transactions on the blockchain do not reveal
the sender, receiver, or even the content (e.g., amount) of the transaction. For enterprise

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

43 of 52

blockchains, which are typically permissioned, there is a greater emphasis on privacy,
as corporations value the ability to keep their business activities private. On the other
hand, public blockchains emphasize openness as a key characteristic that enables auditability. However, users still value the ability to keep information that is non-relevant to the
transaction private, such as their identity. Numerous privacy protocols, like as Zcash [79]
and Monero [77], have developed a variety of (non-)cryptographic techniques for entirely
anonymizing transactions, such as ring signatures, homomorphic commitments, zeroknowledge proofs, etc. Certain protocols require users to interact with networks via specific
anonymizing communication protocols such as Tor [216]. By now, privacy remains subject
to numerous research obstacles. There are two main concerns around privacy for users:
identity privacy and transaction privacy. The term identity privacy refers to the practice
of maintaining related participants’ information without disclosing it to unauthorised
third parties. The term transaction privacy relates to the specifics of the data or quantity
transmitted between network users.
On the one hand, cryptographic protocols are able to provide computationally perfect
privacy as long as the private keys remain secret. On the other hand, in order to comply
with regulations in Fintech industry, for example, Anti-Money Laundering and Financing
of Terrorism (AML-CFT), when required, the transactions’ information must be revealed to
authorized agencies. Solving this dilemma is still open to the research community.
In terms of privacy, there are two major considerations:
De-anonymization De-anonymization [217] is the process of evaluating a network by
monitoring transactions between accounts and deducing information about account
data. This can be accomplished by performing a static analysis of the network
information included in a blockchain.
Transaction Fingerprinting By doing cluster analysis on the user information on a network, transaction behaviors can be retrieved. Numerous attributed, such as random
time interval (RTI), hour of the day (HOD), time of the hour (TOH), time of the day
(TOD), coin flow (CF), and input/output balance (IOB), are available to consider the
transaction information [218].
The following are some of the open research questions (ORQ) in this field.
ORQ1: Many contracts performed in a business context is done in confidence. How can
we implement private smart contracts?
ORQ2: How can we perform an KYC/AML compliance in blockchain-based Fintech
applications whilst offering users and transactions privacy?
ORQ3: How can blockchain-based Fintech applications comply with privacy requirements
such as the right to be forgotten, or other data rights under the GDPR framework?
ORQ4: The current cryptographic primitives being used to ensure privacy such as ZeroKnowledge Proofs or special signatures are not suitable for use in a tap-pay user
experience. Can we design efficient cryptographic algorithms for low resource devices?
5.5. Law and Regulation
Dealing with legal and regulatory frameworks is a critical challenge when incorporating innovative technologies into financial services. In general, it takes a long time to
develop solid and reliable legal and regulatory policies. This is especially critical when
traditional systems are being disrupted by innovations such as blockchain. It is necessary to
set new standards guiding the rules and regulations governing technology. The key selling
point of blockchain is that it eliminates a large number of intermediates, which means that
the structures that these intermediaries had influence over will no longer exist. As a result,
it is critical for Fintech to include legal and regulatory study alongside technical issues. The
following are possible classifications for open research challenges in this area:

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

44 of 52

Inter-Continental
•
•

•
•

Due to the fact that blockchain applications span multiple countries, legal and regulatory requirements within those countries may become ineffective.
Financial services have a tendency to migrate to less restrictive jurisdictions when
they are prohibited in one. If there are no legal safeguards in place for these scenarios,
it will be hard to manage hostile activity.
At the moment, the majority of designs being offered are being tested in siloed environments, which do not fully simulate working with many entities.
When it comes to payments, states and governments must collaborate to develop
shared regulatory sandboxes in which new technologies can be tested. Particularly for
use cases such as cross-border payments, it is critical to thoroughly examine the risks
associated with employing blockchain as the underlying technology.

National
•
•
•

Numerous usecases for blockchain are being evaluated within country-specific regulatory domains, but again, this is limited to usecase-specific circumstances.
Users must be assured of the stability of the system under consideration. This is
because the majority of blockchain applications entail high-value transactions.
Priority should be directed to educating the public on both the benefits and risks. For
instance, when customers register with centralized exchanges, are they aware that
their private keys are not in their control?

Domain-Specific
•
•

•

When code becomes law, it is critical to understand how difficulties should be handled
when the semantics of code are not specified and learned uniformly by all.
Within specified areas, a mechanism for incorporating legal documents into the code
should exist. R3 Corda is the more well-known protocol that implements this concept.
However, this should be consistent across platforms.
Multiple protocols may be working to improve processes within a single domain,
and we have identified interoperability as a critical topic of research. If the platforms
are distinct, how are compliance and regulatory challenges addressed? Is there a
standardized legal template to which all of these platforms can relate is a critical
research subject that has to be addressed.
The following are some of the open research questions (ORQ) in this field.

ORQ1: Can smart contracts’ compliance and adherence with local regulations be validated?
ORQ2: How can compliance and regulatory challenges be handled across different platforms that are bridged together?
ORQ3: How should legal disputes be handled if a platform spans across jurisdictions that
have legally divergent consequences?
6. Conclusions
The fintech ecosystem is always evolving into new regimes. Blockchain/DLT is here
to stay and is gradually permeating all facets of society. We have discussed in depth all
of the fundamental principles necessary for comprehending the technology underlying
blockchains. We established a taxonomy of blockchain platforms based on the categories of
distributed ledger technologies and the most widely used platforms within each group. We
then have extensively covered the use cases for each of the Fintech ecosystem’s verticals.
These use cases are prevalent in public blockchain ecosystems and are upending established
financial transaction protocols. As said previously, blockchain also has a slew of challenges
due to the fact that it is still in its infancy, at least in enterprise contexts. We discussed open
research problems related to all parts of blockchain and Fintech.
As a result of our study, we hope to reorient Fintech firms toward the critical obstacles
that remain unsolved in Blockchain for Fintech applications. Due to the fact that this

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

45 of 52

involves financial services and has the potential to cause irreversible damage both nationally
and internationally across multiple industries, we must pay close attention to performance,
security, and privacy concerns. In terms of performance, we should strive to create a system
that is more efficient than the current system. That is a significant improvement over the
current state of blockchain technology. Criminal activity and hacking should be regulated,
which has been a primary objective of financial regulators. With the addition of blockchain,
it remains to be seen if this provides a more robust regulatory framework or creates further
loopholes for bad actors. Finally, we need to instill customer confidence in blockchain
technology, which is another difficult task given the prevalence of security and privacy
concerns across key blockchain platforms.
This work will present an overview of the Fintech ecosystem and the topics that can
be investigated as a result of the new digital advances brought forth by blockchain. On the
other hand, fintech players such as Visa, Mastercard, and large financial institutions are
already conducting research and have made their findings public. In our future study, we
intend to examine these works and develop a conceptual understanding of the objectives
pursued by these entities. Additionally, we would like to bridge the divide between the
public and enterprise blockchain ecosystems and envision the common ground between
the two scenarios, as well as how this would work under legal and regulatory constraints.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.N., H.D. and D.-P.L.; methodology, K.N., H.D. and
D.-P.L.; writing—original draft preparation, K.N.; writing—review and editing, H.D. and D.-P.L.;
supervision, D.-P.L. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available in article.
Conflicts of Interest: The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors, and no
responsibility for them should be attributed to the Bank of Canada.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

Statista. Investments into Fintech Companies Globally 2010–2021. 2022. Available online: https://www.statista.com/statistics/
719385/investments-into-fintech-companies-globally/ (accessed on 25 February 2022).
Insider, B. Overview of the Fintech Industry: Stats, Trends, and Companies in the Ecosystem Market Research Report. 2022.
Available online: https://www.businessinsider.com/fintech-ecosystem-report (accessed on 15 March 2022).
Lee, I.; Shin, Y.J. Fintech: Ecosystem, business models, investment decisions, and challenges. Bus. Horiz. 2018, 61, 35–46.
[CrossRef]
Franco-Riquelme, J.N.; Rubalcaba, L. Innovation and SDGs through Social Media Analysis: Messages from FinTech Firms. J.
Open Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 2021, 7, 165. [CrossRef]
Gomber, P.; Kauffman, R.J.; Parker, C.; Weber, B.W. On the fintech revolution: Interpreting the forces of innovation, disruption,
and transformation in financial services. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 2018, 35, 220–265. [CrossRef]
Jakšič, M.; Marinč, M. Relationship banking and information technology: The role of artificial intelligence and FinTech. Risk
Manag. 2019, 21, 1–18. [CrossRef]
Belanche, D.; Casaló, L.V.; Flavián, C. Artificial Intelligence in FinTech: Understanding robo-advisors adoption among customers.
Ind. Manag. Data Syst. 2019, 119, 1411–1430. [CrossRef]
Ashta, A.; Herrmann, H. Artificial intelligence and fintech: An overview of opportunities and risks for banking, investments, and
microfinance. Strateg. Chang. 2021, 30, 211–222. [CrossRef]
Meng, S.; He, X.; Tian, X. Research on Fintech development issues based on embedded cloud computing and big data analysis.
Microprocess. Microsystems 2021, 83, 103977. [CrossRef]
Trelewicz, J.Q. Big data and big money: The role of data in the financial sector. It Prof. 2017, 19, 8–10. [CrossRef]
Pant, S.K. Fintech: Emerging Trends. Telecom Bus. Rev. 2020, 13, 47–52.
Tan, S.; Yang, Y.; Leopold, C.; Robeller, C.; Weber, U. Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality: New Tools for Architectural
Visualization and Design. In Research Culture in Architecture; Walter De Gruyter: Berlin, Germany, 2019; pp. 301–310.
Fernandez-Vazquez, S.; Rosillo, R.; De La Fuente, D.; Priore, P. Blockchain in FinTech: A mapping study. Sustainability 2019,
11, 6366. [CrossRef]
Imerman, M.B.; Fabozzi, F.J. Cashing in on innovation: A taxonomy of FinTech. J. Asset Manag. 2020, 21, 167–177. [CrossRef]

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

15.
16.

17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

46 of 52

Sardana, V.; Singhania, S. Digital technology in the realm of banking: A review of literature. Int. J. Res. Financ. Manag. 2018,
1, 28–32.
BusinessWire. 2022. Available online: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20220218005233/en/Global-DigitalPayment-Market-is-Expected-to-Grow-at-a-CAGR-of-over-20.5-During-2022-2030---ResearchAndMarkets.com (accessed on 7
March 2022).
Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis. 2022. Available online: https://www.stlouisfed.org/education/tools-for-enhancing-the-stockmarket-game-invest-it-forward/episode-1-understanding-capital-markets (accessed on 7 March 2022).
Biery, M.E. What Is Digital Lending and How Can Community Banks, Credit Unions Benefit. 2018. Available online:
https://www.abrigo.com/blog/what-is-digital-lending-and-how-can-community-banks-credit-unions-benefit/ (accessed on 3
March 2022).
Arner, D.W.; Barberis, J.; Buckley, R.P. FinTech and RegTech in a Nutshell, and the Future in a Sandbox; CFA Institute Research
Foundation: Charlottesville, VA, USA, 2017; Volume 3, pp. 1–20.
Nakamoto, S. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. Technical Report. 2008. Available online: https://bitcoin.org/
bitcoin.pdf (accessed on 3 March 2022).
Wood, G. Ethereum: A Secure Decentralised Generalised Transaction Ledger; Technical Report; Ethereum & ETHCore: New York, NY,
USA, 2016; Volume 151, pp. 1–32.
Foundation, L. Hyperledger Fabric. 2015. Available online: https://hyperledger-fabric.readthedocs.io (accessed on 15 March
2022).
Greenspan, G. MultiChain Private Blockchain—White Paper. 2015. Available online: https://www.multichain.com/white-paper/
(accessed on 15 March 2022).
Lee, S.H.; Lee, D.W. Review on Fintech Industry in Oversea. In Proceedings of the Conference on Circuits, Control, Communication, Electricity, Electronics, Energy, System, Signal and Simulation, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, 12–19 October 2016.
Hendershott, T.; Zhang, X.; Zhao, J.L.; Zheng, Z. FinTech as a game changer: Overview of research frontiers. Inf. Syst. Res. 2021,
32, 1–17. [CrossRef]
Suryono, R.R.; Budi, I.; Purwandari, B. Challenges and trends of financial technology (Fintech): A systematic literature review.
Information 2020, 11, 590. [CrossRef]
Li, B.; Xu, Z. Insights into financial technology (FinTech): A bibliometric and visual study. Financ. Innov. 2021, 7, 1–28. [CrossRef]
Bollaert, H.; Lopez-de Silanes, F.; Schwienbacher, A. Fintech and access to finance. J. Corp. Financ. 2021, 68, 101941. [CrossRef]
Takeda, A.; Ito, Y. A review of FinTech research. Int. J. Technol. Manag. 2021, 86, 67–88. [CrossRef]
Sangwan, V.; Prakash, P.; Singh, S. Financial technology: A review of extant literature. Stud. Econ. Financ. 2019, 37, 71–88.
[CrossRef]
Knewtson, H.S.; Rosenbaum, Z.A. Toward understanding FinTech and its industry. Manag. Financ. 2020, 46, 1043–1060.
[CrossRef]
Milian, E.Z.; Spinola, M.D.M.; de Carvalho, M.M. Fintechs: A literature review and research agenda. Electron. Commer. Res. Appl.
2019, 34, 100833. [CrossRef]
Xu, M.; Chen, X.; Kou, G. A systematic review of blockchain. Financ. Innov. 2019, 5, 1–14. [CrossRef]
Ali, O.; Ally, M.; Dwivedi, Y. The state of play of blockchain technology in the financial services sector: A systematic literature
review. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2020, 54, 102199. [CrossRef]
Rabbani, M.R.; Khan, S.; Thalassinos, E.I. FinTech, Blockchain and Islamic Finance: An Extensive Literature Review. Int. J. Econ.
Bus. Adm. 2020, VIII, 65–86.
Cao, S.; Cao, Y.; Wang, X.; Lu, Y. A review of researches on blockchain. In Proceedings of the Wuhan International Conference on
e-Business, Wuhan, China, 29–28 May 2017.
Da Luz, M.A.; de Oliveira, K.S.F. The Use of Blockchain in Financial Area: A Systematic Mapping Study. In Proceedings of the
Anais do XVI Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação; SBC: São Bernardo do Camp, Brazil, 2020.
Frizzo-Barker, J.; Chow-White, P.A.; Adams, P.R.; Mentanko, J.; Ha, D.; Green, S. Blockchain as a disruptive technology for
business: A systematic review. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2020, 51, 102029. [CrossRef]
Pal, A.; Tiwari, C.K.; Behl, A. Blockchain technology in financial services: A comprehensive review of the literature. J. Glob. Oper.
Strateg. Sourc. 2021, 14, 61–80. [CrossRef]
Trivedi, S.; Mehta, K.; Sharma, R. Systematic Literature Review on Application of Blockchain Technology in E-Finance and
Financial Services. J. Technol. Manag. Innov. 2021, 16, 89–102. [CrossRef]
Gamage, H.; Weerasinghe, H.; Dias, N. A survey on blockchain technology concepts, applications, and issues. SN Comput. Sci.
2020, 1, 1–15. [CrossRef]
Gan, Q.; Lau, R.Y.K.; Hong, J. A critical review of blockchain applications to banking and finance: A qualitative thematic analysis
approach. Technol. Anal. Strateg. Manag. 2021, 1–17. [CrossRef]
Osmani, M.; El-Haddadeh, R.; Hindi, N.; Janssen, M.; Weerakkody, V. Blockchain for next generation services in banking and
finance: Cost, benefit, risk and opportunity analysis. J. Enterp. Inf. Manag. 2021, 34, 884–899. [CrossRef]
Gorkhali, A.; Chowdhury, R. Blockchain and the Evolving Financial Market: A Literature Review. J. Ind. Integr. Manag. 2021,
1–35. [CrossRef]
Maiti, M.; Ghosh, U. Next generation Internet of Things in fintech ecosystem. IEEE Internet Things J. 2021. [CrossRef]

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

46.
47.
48.

49.
50.
51.
52.
53.

54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.

66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.

47 of 52

Maiti, M.; Kotliarov, I.; Lipatnikov, V. A future triple entry accounting framework using blockchain technology. Blockchain Res.
Appl. 2021, 2, 100037. [CrossRef]
Javaid, M.; Haleem, A.; Singh, R.P.; Khan, S.; Suman, R. Blockchain technology applications for Industry 4.0: A literature-based
review. Blockchain Res. Appl. 2021, 2, 100027. [CrossRef]
Chondrogiannis, E.; Andronikou, V.; Karanastasis, E.; Litke, A.; Varvarigou, T. Using blockchain and semantic web technologies
for the implementation of smart contracts between individuals and health insurance organizations. Blockchain Res. Appl. 2022,
3, 100049. [CrossRef]
Six, N.; Herbaut, N.; Salinesi, C. Blockchain software patterns for the design of decentralized applications: A systematic literature
review. Blockchain Res. Appl. 2022, 3, 100061. [CrossRef]
NIST-FIPS. FIPS Publication 180-2: Secure Hash Standard; Technical Report; Federal Information Processing Standard Publication:
Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 2002.
America National Standard Institute. Public Key Cryptography for the Financial Services Industry: The Elliptic Curve Digital Signature
Algorithm (ECDSA); ANSI: San Fransisco, CA, USA, 1998.
Rivest, R.L.; Shamir, A.; Tauman, Y. How to Leak a Secret; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2001; pp. 552–565.
Blum, M.; Feldman, P.; Micali, S. Non-Interactive Zero-Knowledge and Its Applications. In Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC ’88); Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 1988; pp. 103–112.
[CrossRef]
Pedersen, T.P. Non-interactive and information-theoretic secure verifiable secret sharing. In Proceedings of the Annual
International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 11–15 August 1991; pp. 129–140.
Szabo, N. Formalizing and securing relationships on public networks. First Monday 1997, 2. [CrossRef]
Bosselaers, A.; Preneel, B. Integrity Primitives for Secure Information Systems: Final Ripe Report of Race Integrity Primitives Evaluation;
Number 1007; Springer Science & Business Media: New York, NY, USA, 1995.
Dobbertin, H.; Bosselaers, A.; Preneel, B. RIPEMD-160: A strengthened version of RIPEMD. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Fast Software Encryption; Springer: Cambridge, UK, 1996; pp. 71–82.
Litecoin. Litecoin—Open Source P2P Digital Currency. Technical Report. 2011. Available online: https://litecoin.org/ (accessed
on 30 November 2012).
Percival, C.; Josefsson, S. The Scrypt Password-Based Key Derivation Function. 2016. Available online: http://tools.ietf.org/
html/josefsson-scrypt-kdf-00.txt (accessed on 7 March 2022).
Biryukov, A.; Khovratovich, D. Equihash: Asymmetric proof-of-work based on the generalized birthday problem. Ledger 2017,
2, 1–30. [CrossRef]
Merkle, R.C. A digital signature based on a conventional encryption function. In Proceedings of the Conference on the Theory
and Application of Cryptographic Techniques, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 16–20 August 1987; pp. 369–378.
Diffie, W.; Hellman, M. New Directions in Cryptography. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theor. 2006, 22, 644–654. [CrossRef]
National Institute of Standards and Technology. Digital Signature Standard; NIST: Washington, DC, USA, 1994.
Vanstone, S. Responses to NIST’s Proposal. Commun. ACM 1992, 35, 50–52.
International Standard Organization. Information Technology—Security Techniques—Cryptographic Techniques Based on
Elliptic Curves—Part 2: Digital Signatures. 2002. Available online: https://www.iso.org/standard/31076.html (accessed on 7
March 2022).
IEEE Computer Society. IEEE Std 1363-2000; IEEE Standard Specifications for Public-Key Cryptography; IEEE Computer Society:
Washington, DC, USA, 2000; pp. 1–228. [CrossRef]
Lamport, L. Constructing Digital Signatures from a One Way Function; Technical Report CSL-98; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 1979;
This paper was published by IEEE in the Proceedings of HICSS-43 in January 2010.
Chaum, D. Blind signatures for untraceable payments. In Advances in Cryptology; Springer: Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 1983; pp.
199–203.
Van Saberhagen, N. CryptoNote v 2.0; Technical Report. 2013. Available online: https://bytecoin.org/old/whitepaper.pdf
(accessed on 7 March 2022).
Maxwell, G.; Poelstra, A. Borromean ring signatures. Comput. Sci. 2015, 8, 2019.
Valenta, L.; Rowan, B. Blindcoin: Blinded, accountable mixes for bitcoin. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Financial Cryptography and Data Security, San Juan, Puerto Rico, 26–30 January 2015; pp. 112–126.
Itakura, K.; Nakamura, K. A Public-Key Cryptosystem Suitable for Digital Multisignatures; NEC Research & Development: Kanagawa,
Japan, 1983; pp. 1–8.
Le, D.P.; Yang, G.; Ghorbani, A. A new multisignature scheme with public key aggregation for blockchain. In Proceedings of the
2019 17th International Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST), Fredericton, NB, Canada, 26–28 August 2019; pp. 1–7.
Benaloh, J.; Mare, M.D. One-way accumulators: A decentralized alternative to digital signatures. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
the Theory and Application of of Cryptographic Techniques; Springer: Lofthus, Norway, 1993; pp. 274–285.
Nguyen, L. Accumulators from bilinear pairings and applications. In Proceedings of the Cryptographers’ Track at the RSA
Conference, San Francisco, CA, USA, 14–18 February 2005; pp. 275–292.
Boxall, J.; El Mrabet, N.; Laguillaumie, F.; Le, D.P. A Variant of Miller’s Formula and Algorithm. In Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Pairing-Based Cryptography (Pairing’10); Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2010; pp. 417–434.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

77.

48 of 52

Sun, S.F.; Au, M.H.; Liu, J.K.; Yuen, T.H. Ringct 2.0: A compact accumulator-based (linkable ring signature) protocol for blockchain
cryptocurrency monero. In Proceedings of the European Symposium on Research in Computer Security, Oslo, Norway, 11–15
September 2017; pp. 456–474.
78. Miers, I.; Garman, C.; Green, M.; Rubin, A.D. Zerocoin: Anonymous distributed e-cash from bitcoin. In Proceedings of the 2013
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, Berkeley, CA, USA, 19–22 May 2013; pp. 397–411.
79. Sasson, E.B.; Chiesa, A.; Garman, C.; Green, M.; Miers, I.; Tromer, E.; Virza, M. Zerocash: Decentralized Anonymous Payments
from Bitcoin. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Security and Privacy, Berkeley, CA, USA, 18–21 May 2014.
80. Ben-Sasson, E.; Chiesa, A.; Riabzev, M.; Spooner, N.; Virza, M.; Ward, N.P. Aurora: Transparent succinct arguments for R1CS. In
Proceedings of the Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Darmstadt,
Germany, 19–23 May 2019; pp. 103–128.
81. Bünz, B.; Bootle, J.; Boneh, D.; Poelstra, A.; Wuille, P.; Maxwell, G. Bulletproofs: Short proofs for confidential transactions and
more. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), Berkeley, CA, USA, 21–23 May 2018; pp.
315–334.
82. Cong, L.W.; He, Z. Blockchain disruption and smart contracts. Rev. Financ. Stud. 2019, 32, 1754–1797. [CrossRef]
83. Dcunha, S.; Patel, S.; Sawant, S.; Kulkarni, V.; Shirole, M. Blockchain Interoperability Using Hash Time Locks. In Proceedings of
the Fifth International Conference on Microelectronics, Computing and Communication Systems, Ranchi, India, 12–13 May 2021;
pp. 475–487.
84. Han, J.; Huang, S.; Zhong, Z. Trust in DeFi: An Empirical Study of the Decentralized Exchange. 2021. Available online:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3896461 (accessed on 7 March 2022).
85. Poon, J.; Dryja, T. The Bitcoin Lightning Network: Scalable Off-Chain Instant Payments. White Paper, 14 January 2016. Available
online: https://lightning.network/lightning-network-paper.pdf (accessed on 7 March 2022).
86. Besedin, S.; Mitrokhin, A. Decentralized Escrow Whitepaper. Technical Report. 2017. Available online: https://descrow.com/
images/WP_en.pdf (accessed on 7 March 2022).
87. Goldfeder, S.; Bonneau, J.; Gennaro, R.; Narayanan, A. Escrow protocols for cryptocurrencies: How to buy physical goods using
bitcoin. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, Sliema, Malta, 3–7 April
2017; pp. 321–339.
88. Herlihy, M. Atomic cross-chain swaps. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing,
Egham, UK, 23–27 July 2018; pp. 245–254.
89. Hardjono, T. Blockchain gateways, bridges and delegated hash-locks. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2102.03933.
90. Blockchain Bridges. 2022. Available online: https://ethereum.org/en/bridges/ (accessed on 3 March 2022).
91. Kfoury, B. The Role of Blockchain in Reducing the Cost of Financial Transactions in the Retail Industry. Technical Report. 2021.
Available online: http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2889/PAPER_02.pdf (accessed on 15 March 2022).
92. Mori, T. Financial technology: Blockchain and securities settlement. J. Secur. Oper. Custody 2016, 8, 208–227.
93. Tasca, P.; Tessone, C.J. Taxonomy of blockchain technologies. Principles of identification and classification. arXiv 2017,
arXiv:1708.04872.
94. Zhang, C.; Wu, C.; Wang, X. Overview of Blockchain consensus mechanism. In Proceedings of the 2020 2nd International
Conference on Big Data Engineering, Shanghai, China, 29–31 May 2020; pp. 7–12.
95. Vukolić, M. The Quest for Scalable Blockchain Fabric: Proof-of-Work vs. BFT Replication. In Open Problems in Network Security.
iNetSec 2015. Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Camenisch, J., Kesdoğan, D., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2015; Volume
9591._9. [CrossRef]
96. Saleh, F. Blockchain without waste: Proof-of-stake. Rev. Financ. Stud. 2021, 34, 1156–1190. [CrossRef]
97. Nair, P.R.; Dorai, D.R. Evaluation of performance and security of proof of work and proof of stake using blockchain. In
Proceedings of the 2021 Third International Conference on Intelligent Communication Technologies and Virtual Mobile Networks
(ICICV), Virtual, 4–6 February 2021; pp. 279–283.
98. Reijers, W.; Wuisman, I.; Mannan, M.; De Filippi, P.; Wray, C.; Rae-Looi, V.; Cubillos Vélez, A.; Orgad, L. Now the Code Runs
Itself: On-Chain and Off-Chain Governance of Blockchain Technologies. Topoi 2021, 40, 821–831. [CrossRef]
99. Chohan, U.W. The Decentralized Autonomous Organization and Governance Issues. 2017. Available online: https://ssrn.com/
abstract=3082055 (accessed on 7 March 2022).
100. Zhang, R.; Xue, R.; Liu, L. Security and privacy on blockchain. ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR) 2019, 52, 1–34. [CrossRef]
101. Chen, X.; Hasan, M.A.; Wu, X.; Skums, P.; Feizollahi, M.J.; Ouellet, M.; Sevigny, E.L.; Maimon, D.; Wu, Y. Characteristics of
bitcoin transactions on cryptomarkets. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Security, Privacy and Anonymity in
Computation, Communication and Storage, Atlanta, GA, USA, 14–17 July 2019; pp. 261–276.
102. Guides, T.S. Why Cardano ADA Deserves Your Attention—Cardano Cryptocurrency Strategy. 2018. Available online:
https://tradingstrategyguides.com/cardano-cryptocurrency-strategy/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
103. Silvano, W.F.; Marcelino, R. Iota Tangle: A cryptocurrency to communicate Internet-of-Things data. Future Gener. Comput. Syst.
2020, 112, 307–319. [CrossRef]
104. Chen, J.; Micali, S. Algorand: A secure and efficient distributed ledger. Theor. Comput. Sci. 2019, 777, 155–183. [CrossRef]
105. Brown, R.G.; Carlyle, J.; Grigg, I.; Hearn, M. Corda: An introduction. R3 CEV 2016, 1, 14.

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

49 of 52

106. Baliga, A.; Subhod, I.; Kamat, P.; Chatterjee, S. Performance evaluation of the quorum blockchain platform. arXiv 2018,
arXiv:1809.03421.
107. Consensys. Quorum Blockchain. 2022. Available online: https://github.com/ConsenSys/quorum (accessed on 15 March 2022).
108. Diem. Diem Blockchain. 2022. Available online: https://www.diem.com/en-us/ (accessed on 15 March 2022).
109. Kelley, M.; Mahdi, D. Innovation Insight for Decentralized Identity and Verifiable Claims; Technical Report; Gartner Research:
Stamford, CT, USA, 2021.
110. Foundation, H. Decentralized ID and Access Management (DIAM) for IoT Networks; Technical Report; Linux Foundation: San
Francisco, CA, USA, 2021.
111. Lyons, T.; Courcelas, L.; Timsit, K. Blockchain and Digital Identity; Technical Report; The European Union Blockchain Observatory
& Forum: Washington, DC, USA, 2019.
112. Pertsev, A.; Semenov, R.; Storm, R. Tornado Cash Privacy Solution Version 1.4. 2019. Available online: https://tornado.cash/
Tornado.cash_whitepaper_v1.4.pdf (accessed on 15 March 2022).
113. Hopwood, D.; Bowe, S.; Hornby, T.; Wilcox, N. Zcash Protocol Specification; GitHub: San Francisco, CA, USA, 2016; p. 1.
114. Ali, R.; Barrdear, J.; Clews, R.; Southgate, J. The economics of digital currencies. Bank Engl. Q. Bull. 2014, 54, 276–286.
115. Allen, F.; Gu, X.; Jagtiani, J. Fintech, Cryptocurrencies, and CBDC: Financial Structural Transformation in China. J. Int. Money
Financ. 2022, 124, 102625. [CrossRef]
116. Calcaterra, C.; Kaal, W.A.; Rao, V. Stable cryptocurrencies: First order principles. Stan. J. Blockchain L. Pol’y 2020, 3, 62. [CrossRef]
117. Bogoni, G. Cryptocurrencies Stabilization Systems: A Focus on the MakerDAO Case. 2019. Available online: https://www.
politesi.polimi.it/handle/10589/152447?mode=full (accessed on 15 March 2022).
118. Acker, A.; Murthy, D. What is Venmo? A descriptive analysis of social features in the mobile payment platform. Telemat. Inform.
2020, 52, 101429. [CrossRef]
119. Tsepeleva, R.; Korkhov, V. Implementation of the Cross-Blockchain Interacting Protocol. In Computational Science and Its
Applications—ICCSA 2021. Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2021; Volume 12952._4. [CrossRef]
120. Fung, B.; Halaburda, H. Understanding platform-based digital currencies. Bank Can. Rev. 2014, 2014, 12–20.
121. Meta. 2022. Available online: https://about.facebook.com/meta/ (accessed on 6 March 2022).
122. Amazon. 2022. Available online: https://www.aboutamazon.com/ (accessed on 6 March 2022).
123. Kiff, M.J.; Alwazir, J.; Davidovic, S.; Farias, A.; Khan, M.A.; Khiaonarong, M.T.; Malaika, M.; Monroe, M.H.K.; Sugimoto,
N.; Tourpe, H.; et al. A Survey of Research on Retail Central Bank Digital Currency. 1 July 2020. Available online: https:
//ssrn.com/abstract=3639760 (accessed on 15 March 2022). http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3639760.
124. Zhang, T.; Huang, Z. Blockchain and central bank digital currency. ICT Express 2021. [CrossRef]
125. Bank of International Settlements. 2022. Available online: https://www.bis.org/publ/othp33.pdf (accessed on 14 March 2022).
126. Atlantic Council. 2022. Available online: https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/econographics/a-report-card-on-chinascentral-bank-digital-currency-the-e-cny/ (accessed on 6 March 2022).
127. MIT Media Lab. 2022. Available online: https://dci.mit.edu/project-hamilton-building-a-hypothetical-cbdc (accessed on 7
March 2022).
128. Liu, Y.; Vogel, S.; Zhang, Y. Electronic trading in OTC markets vs. centralized exchange. In Proceedings of the Finance Meeting
EUROFIDAI-AFFI, Paris, France, 20 December 2018.
129. Xu, J.; Paruch, K.; Cousaert, S.; Feng, Y. Sok: Decentralized exchanges (dex) with automated market maker (AMM) protocols.
arXiv 2021, arXiv:2103.12732.
130. Capponi, A.; Jia, R. The adoption of blockchain-based decentralized exchanges. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2103.08842.
131. Uniswap. 2022. Available online: https://uniswap.org/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
132. Sushiswap. 2022. Available online: https://www.sushi.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
133. Balancer. 2022. Available online: https://balancer.fi/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
134. Qin, K.; Zhou, L.; Afonin, Y.; Lazzaretti, L.; Gervais, A. CeFi vs. DeFi–Comparing Centralized to Decentralized Finance. arXiv
2021, arXiv:2106.08157.
135. Werner, S.M.; Perez, D.; Gudgeon, L.; Klages-Mundt, A.; Harz, D.; Knottenbelt, W.J. Sok: Decentralized finance (defi). arXiv 2021,
arXiv:2101.08778.
136. Qin, K.; Zhou, L.; Livshits, B.; Gervais, A. Attacking the DeFi Ecosystem with Flash Loans for Fun and Profit. In Financial
Cryptography and Data Security. FC 2021. Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Borisov, N., Diaz, C., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2021; Volume 12674._1. [CrossRef]
137. Compound. 2022. Available online: https://compound.finance/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
138. Aave. 2022. Available online: https://aave.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
139. dYdX. 2022. Available online: https://dydx.exchange/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
140. Gudgeon, L.; Werner, S.; Perez, D.; Knottenbelt, W.J. Defi protocols for loanable funds: Interest rates, liquidity and market
efficiency. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies, New York, NY, USA, 21–23
October 2020; pp. 92–112.
141. Synthetix. 2022. Available online: https://synthetix.io/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
142. Nexus. 2022. Available online: https://nexusmutual.io/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
143. Erasure. 2022. Available online: https://erasure.world/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

50 of 52

144. jumpcrypto.com. 2022. Available online: https://jumpcrypto.com/state-of-crypto-derivatives-market/ (accessed on 7 March
2022).
145. Beniiche, A. A study of blockchain oracles. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2004.07140.
146. Egberts, A. The Oracle Problem—An Analysis of how Blockchain Oracles Undermine the Advantages of Decentralized
Ledger Systems. 13 December 2017. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3382343 (accessed on 7 March 2022).
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3382343.
147. Pasdar, A.; Dong, Z.; Lee, Y.C. Blockchain Oracle Design Patterns. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2106.09349.
148. Zhang, F.; Maram, D.; Malvai, H.; Goldfeder, S.; Juels, A. Deco: Liberating web data using decentralized oracles for tls. In
Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Virtual Event, 9–13 November
2020; pp. 1919–1938.
149. Liu, B.; Szalachowski, P.; Zhou, J. A First Look into DeFi Oracles. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International
Conference on Decentralized Applications and Infrastructures (DAPPS), London, UK, 23–26 August 2021; pp. 39–48.
doi:10.1109/DAPPS52256.2021.00010. [CrossRef]
150. Adler, J.; Berryhill, R.; Veneris, A.; Poulos, Z.; Veira, N.; Kastania, A. Astraea: A Decentralized Blockchain Oracle. In Proceedings
of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications
(GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData), Dalian, China, 20–21
October 2018; pp. 1145–1152. doi:10.1109/Cybermatics_2018.2018.00207. [CrossRef]
151. Goel, N.; Filos-Ratsikas, A.; Faltings, B. Decentralized Oracles via Peer-Prediction in the Presence of Lying Incentives. 2019.
Available online: https://arisfilosratsikas.com/papers/decentralized_oracles.pdf (accessed on 7 March 2022).
152. Merlini, M.; Veira, N.; Berryhill, R.; Veneris, A. On Public Decentralized Ledger Oracles via a Paired-Question Protocol. In
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC), Seoul, Korea, 14–17 May 2019;
pp. 337–344. doi:10.1109/BLOC.2019.8751484. [CrossRef]
153. Cai, Y.; Fragkos, G.; Tsiropoulou, E.E.; Veneris, A. 2020 A Truth-Inducing Sybil Resistant Decentralized Blockchain Oracle. In
Proceedings of the 2020 2nd Conference on Blockchain Research & Applications for Innovative Networks and Services (BRAINS),
Paris, France, 28–30 September 2020; pp. 128–135. doi:10.1109/BRAINS49436.2020.9223272. [CrossRef]
154. Peterson, J.; Krug, J.; Zoltu, M.; Williams, A.K.; Alexander, S. Augur: A decentralized oracle and prediction market platform.
arXiv 2015, arXiv:1501.01042.
155. De Pedro, A.S.; Levi, D.; Cuende, L.I. Witnet: A decentralized oracle network protocol. arXiv 2017, arXiv:1711.09756.
156. Breidenbach, L.; Cachin, C.; Chan, B.; Coventry, A.; Ellis, S.; Juels, A.; Koushanfar, F.; Miller, A.; Magauran, B.; Moroz,
D.; et al. Chainlink 2.0: Next Steps in the Evolution of Decentralized Oracle Networks. 2021. Available online: https:
//research.chain.link/whitepaper-v2.pdf (accessed on 7 March 2022).
157. Benisi, N.Z.; Aminian, M.; Javadi, B. Blockchain-based decentralized storage networks: A survey. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2020,
162, 102656.
158. Casino, F.; Politou, E.; Alepis, E.; Patsakis, C. Immutability and decentralized storage: An analysis of emerging threats. IEEE
Access 2019, 8, 4737–4744. [CrossRef]
159. Shah, M.; Shaikh, M.; Mishra, V.; Tuscano, G. Decentralized Cloud Storage Using Blockchain. In Proceedings of the 2020 4th
International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI)(48184), Tirunelveli, India, 16–18 April 2020; pp.
384–389.10.1109/ICOEI48184.2020.9143004. [CrossRef]
160. Lakshman, A.; Malik, P. Cassandra: A decentralized structured storage system. ACM SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 2010, 44, 35–40.
[CrossRef]
161. Vorick, D.; Champine, L. Sia: Simple decentralized storage. Retrieved May 2014, 8, 2018.
162. Churyumov, A. Byteball: A Decentralized System for Storage and Transfer of Value. 2016. Available online: https://byteball.org/
Byteball.pdf (accessed on 7 March 2022).
163. Haeberlen, A.; Mislove, A.; Druschel, P. Glacier: Highly durable, decentralized storage despite massive correlated failures. In
Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Symposium on Networked Systems Design & Implementation, Boston, MA, USA, 2–4 May
2005; Volume 2, pp. 143–158.
164. Wilkinson, S.; Lowry, J.; Boshevski, T. Metadisk a Blockchain-Based Decentralized File Storage Application; Technical Report, hal; Storj
Labs Inc.: Atlanta, GA, USA, 2014; pp. 1–11. Available online: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.692.8
781&rep=rep1&type=pdf (accessed on 7 March 2022).
165. Ali, S.; Wang, G.; White, B.; Cottrell, R.L. A Blockchain-Based Decentralized Data Storage and Access Framework for PingER.
In Proceedings of the 2018 17th IEEE International Conference on Trust, Security And Privacy in Computing and Communications/12th IEEE International Conference on Big Data Science and Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE), New York, NY, USA, 1–3
August 2018; pp. 1303–1308. doi:10.1109/TrustCom/BigDataSE.2018.00179. [CrossRef]
166. Ruj, S.; Rahman, M.S.; Basu, A.; Kiyomoto, S. BlockStore: A Secure Decentralized Storage Framework on Blockchain. In
Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE 32nd International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications (AINA),
Krakow, Poland, 16–18 May 2018; pp. 1096–1103. doi:10.1109/AINA.2018.00157. [CrossRef]
167. Filecoin. 2022. Available online: https://filecoin.io/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
168. Medium. 2022. Available online: https://blog.sia.tech/a-deep-dive-into-skynet-a0fa037feea (accessed on 7 March 2022).
169. Alchemy. 2022. Available online: https://www.alchemy.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

51 of 52

170. Ankr. 2022. Available online: https://www.ankr.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
171. BlockDaemon. 2022. Available online: https://blockdaemon.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
172. ChainStack. 2022. Available online: https://chainstack.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
173. Subramanian, H. Decentralized blockchain-based electronic marketplaces. Commun. ACM 2017, 61, 78–84. [CrossRef]
174. Klems, M.; Eberhardt, J.; Tai, S.; Härtlein, S.; Buchholz, S.; Tidjani, A. Trustless Intermediation in Blockchain-Based Decentralized
Service Marketplaces. In Service-Oriented Computing. ICSOC 2017. Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Maximilien, M., Vallecillo, A.,
Wang, J., Oriol, M., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; Volume 10601._53. [CrossRef]
175. Gnosis. 2022. Available online: https://gnosis.io/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
176. Lawrenz, S.; Sharma, P.; Rausch, A. Blockchain technology as an approach for data marketplaces. In Proceedings of the 2019
International Conference on Blockchain Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, 14–17 July 2019; pp. 55–59.
177. Banerjee, P.; Ruj, S. Blockchain Enabled Data Marketplace—Design and Challenges. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1811.11462.
178. Xu, R.; Ramachandran, G.S.; Chen, Y.; Krishnamachari, B. BlendSM-DDM: BLockchain-ENabled Secure Microservices for
Decentralized Data Marketplaces. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2), Casablanca,
Morocco, 14–17 October 2019; pp. 14–17. doi: 10.1109/ISC246665.2019.9071766. [CrossRef]
179. Vousinas, G. Supply chain finance: Definition, modern aspects and research challenges ahead. In Supply Chain Finance: Risk
Management, Resilience and Supplier Management; Tate, W., Bals, L., Ellram, L., Eds.; Kogan Page: London, UK, 2019; pp. 63–95.
Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/327981053_Supply_chain_finance_definition_modern_aspects_
and_research_challenges_ahead (accessed on 7 March 2022).
180. Wang, R.; Wu, Y. Application of Blockchain Technology in Supply Chain Finance of Beibu Gulf Region. Math. Probl. Eng. 2021,
2021, 5556424. [CrossRef]
181. Yaksick, R. Overcoming Supply Chain Finance Challenges Via Blockchain Technology. In Disruptive Innovation in Business and
Finance in the Digital World (International Finance Review, Vol. 20); Choi, J.J., Ozkan, B., Eds.; Emerald Publishing Limited: Bingley,
UK, 2019; pp. 87–100. [CrossRef]
182. Contour. 2022. Available online: https://contour.network/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
183. Skuchain. 2022. Available online: https://www.skuchain.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
184. Etradeconnect. 2022. Available online: https://www.etradeconnect.net/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
185. Kongo. 2022. Available online: https://www.komgo.io/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
186. Marco Polo. 2022. Available online: https://marcopolonetwork.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
187. UAE Trade Connect. 2022. Available online: https://avanzainnovations.com/blog/portfolio/utc/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
188. We.trade. 2022. Available online: https://we-trade.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
189. Singh, H.; Jain, G.; Munjal, A.; Rakesh, S. Blockchain technology in corporate governance: Disrupting chain reaction or not? Corp.
Gov. Int. J. Bus. Soc. 2019, 20, 67–86. [CrossRef]
190. Yermack, D. Corporate governance and blockchains. Rev. Financ. 2017, 21, 7–31. [CrossRef]
191. Wiśniewska, A. The initial coin offering—Challenges and opportunities. Copernic. J. Financ. Account. 2018, 7, 99–110. [CrossRef]
192. Jentzsch, C. Decentralized Autonomous Organization to Automate Governance. White Paper, November 2016. Available online:
https://lawofthelevel.lexblogplatformthree.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/187/2017/07/WhitePaper-1.pdf (accessed on 7
March 2022).
193. Fenwick, M.; Vermeulen, E.P. Technology and corporate governance: Blockchain, crypto, and artificial intelligence. Tex. J. Bus. L.
2019, 48, 1. [CrossRef]
194. Aragon. 2022. Available online: https://aragon.org/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
195. DAOStack. 2022. Available online: https://daostack.io/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
196. Colony. 2022. Available online: https://colony.io/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
197. Oguama, L. Fintech Credit Market—Crowdfunding: An Evaluation of Market Models. 20 September 2020. Available online:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3696044 (accessed on 7 March 2022).
198. Shneor, R.; Zhao, L.; Flåten, B.T. (Eds.) Advances in Crowdfunding; Springer International Publishing: Berlin, Germany, 2020.
[CrossRef]
199. LendingClub. 2022. Available online: https://www.lendingclub.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
200. GoFundMe. 2022. Available online: https://www.gofundme.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
201. AngelList. 2022. Available online: https://angel.co/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
202. Kickstarter. 2022. Available online: https://www.kickstarter.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
203. Lacasse, R.; Lambert, B.; Roy, N.; Sylvain, J.; Nadeau, F. A digital tsunami: FinTech and crowdfunding. In Proceedings of the
International Scientific Conference on Digital Intelligence, Quebec City, QC, Canada, 4–6 April 2016; pp. 1–5.
204. Baber, H. Blockchain-Based Crowdfunding. In Blockchain Technology for Industry 4.0. Blockchain Technologies; Rosa Righi, R., Alberti,
A., Singh, M., Eds.; Springer: Singapore, 2020. [CrossRef]
205. RealBlocks. 2022. Available online: https://www.realblocks.com/home (accessed on 7 March 2022).
206. Meridio. 2022. Available online: https://medium.com/@Meridio (accessed on 7 March 2022).
207. QuantmRE. 2022. Available online: https://www.quantmre.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
208. Gitcoin. 2022. Available online: https://gitcoin.co/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
209. Brickblock. 2022. Available online: https://www.brickblock.io/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).

Cryptography 2022, 6, 18

52 of 52

210. RealtyBits. 2022. Available online: https://www.realtybits.com/ (accessed on 7 March 2022).
211. Zhou, Q.; Huang, H.; Zheng, Z.; Bian, J. Solutions to scalability of blockchain: A survey. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 16440–16455.
[CrossRef]
212. Medium. 2022. Available online: https://aakash-111.medium.com/the-scalability-trilemma-in-blockchain-75fb57f646df
(accessed on 7 March 2022).
213. Nasir, M.H.; Arshad, J.; Khan, M.M.; Fatima, M.; Salah, K.; Jayaraman, R. Scalable blockchains—A systematic review. Future
Gener. Comput. Syst. 2022, 126, 136–162. [CrossRef]
214. Zheng, Z.; Xie, S.; Dai, H.N.; Chen, X.; Wang, H. Blockchain challenges and opportunities: A survey. Int. J. Web Grid Serv. 2018,
14, 352–375. [CrossRef]
215. Medium. 2022. Available online: https://blog.connext.network/the-interoperability-trilemma-657c2cf69f17 (accessed on 7
March 2022).
216. Goldberg, I. On the security of the Tor authentication protocol. In Proceedings of the International Workshop On Privacy
Enhancing Technologies, Cambridge, UK, 28–30 June 2006; pp. 316–331.
217. Feng, Q.; He, D.; Zeadally, S.; Khan, M.K.; Kumar, N. A survey on privacy protection in blockchain system. J. Netw. Comput. Appl.
2019, 126, 45–58. [CrossRef]
218. Androulaki, E.; Karame, G.O.; Roeschlin, M.; Scherer, T.; Capkun, S. Evaluating user privacy in bitcoin. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, Okinawa, Japan, 1–5 April 2013; pp. 34–51.

