Rapid #: -20757189
CROSS REF ID:

6233948

LENDER:

LQ0 (Queensland University of Technology) :: Main Library

BORROWER:

HUL (Harvard University) :: Widener Library

TYPE:

Book Chapter

BOOK TITLE:

Blockchain Technologies for Sustainable Development in Smart Cities

USER BOOK TITLE:

Blockchain Technologies for Sustainable Development in Smart Cities

CHAPTER TITLE:

The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

BOOK AUTHOR:

Swarnalatha, P

EDITION:
VOLUME:
PUBLISHER:

IGI Global

YEAR:

2022

PAGES:

155-186

ISBN:

9781799892748

LCCN:
OCLC #:

Processed by RapidX:

5/11/2023 5:26:58 PM

This material may be protected by copyright law (Copyright Act 1968 (Cth))

155

Chapter 9

The Role of Blockchain
Technology in Harnessing
the Sustainability of
Chinese Digital Finance
Poshan Yu
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1069-3675
Soochow University, China & Krirk University, Thailand
Shengyuan Lu
Independent Researcher, China
Emanuela Hanes
Independent Researcher, Austria
Yijun Chen
Independent Researcher, China

ABSTRACT
In recent years, blockchain, with its features of decentralization, security, reliability, transparency of
information, and low maintenance cost, has been applied in the fintech industry in more and more cases
in China. The maturity of blockchain-enabled technology has improved. This is expected to rebuild the
underlying internet technology or will trigger a new round of development and innovation in the Chinese
fintech industry. This chapter aims to investigate the current application of blockchain technology in
China’s fintech industry by analyzing case studies. Through the comparison and analysis of the cases in
the fintech industry, this chapter attempts to examine how and whether digital transformation and other
innovative technologies can drive new business models and create valuable experiences for consumers
and/or firms in China’s fintech industry. A variety of challenges and opportunities is analyzed to draw
a blueprint for Chinese blockchain development. Finally, this chapter also provides some recommendations to the government.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-7998-9274-8.ch009

Copyright © 2022, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

INTRODUCTION
Blockchain technology use in China has seen substantial institutional and policy change from 2013 to
2021. Under the unique economic environment with Chinese characteristics, the institutional setting
designed by the Chinese government is used as a unique tool to guide the development of digital finance
integrating with blockchain-enabled technology.
This study aims to interpret the interlinked relationships between the policy changes associated with
the promotion of blockchain-enabled technology and the development of digital finance in China from
an institutional perspective. Case studies of successful and unsuccessful applications in China are used
to analyze why some firms and projects can keep running stably and expand rapidly while some applications ended in failure. By analyzing the formation of blockchain and digital finance policies, this
chapter helps the readers better capture the future dynamics of China’s digital finance development and
understand the interrelated reactions of various stakeholders in the industry.
Blockchain technology has attracted much attention not only in people’s work and lifestyle (Guo et
al., 2021) and academia, but also in finance and industry (Beck & Müller-Bloch, 2017). The Ministry
of Industry and Information Technology of the People’s Republic of China (2018) posted a White Paper on China’s Blockchain Industry stating that the various characteristics of blockchain technology
provide trust mechanisms and have the potential to change the financial infrastructure. Different kinds
of financial assets, such as equity, bonds, bills, warehouse receipts, fund shares, etc., can be integrated
into the blockchain ledger and become digital assets on the chain, which can be stored, transferred, and
traded on the blockchain.
The development of blockchain technology can be broken down into three phases: Blockchain 1.0,
2.0 & 3.0 (Swan, 2015). When it comes to the situation in China, the development nowadays is at the
transitory stage from Blockchain 2.0 to Blockchain 3.0. The Chinese government and most enterprises
are in the Blockchain 2.0 stage of rapid development and capacity expansion. Therefore, this paper mainly
introduces the background of the Blockchain 2.0 stage of Chinese blockchain technology application in
the financial sector and its economic impacts on Chinese business. This stage marks the relative application of blockchain technology for other extensive financial applications and the advanced use of more
than just simple cash or digital payments and transactions (Albayati et al., 2020). This entails advantages
and potential for the deeper application in financial smart contracts, capital markets, and so on.
As the industrial blockchain has been steadily promoted, and the value of the blockchain-enabled
industry has been fully verified, one can describe it with the equation: Industrial blockchain 2.0 = industrial chain + asset chain + data chain + technology convergence +CBDC (central bank digital currency)
application (Ning, 2021). It means that on the one hand, at present blockchain technology together with
5G, artificial intelligence (AI), cloud computing and other cutting-edge technologies are accelerating
the deep integration of industrial development, thus becoming a key cornerstone of the digital economy
from the perspective of the industrial chain. On the other hand, it shows that China is presently at the
Blockchain 2.0 stage, mainly in relation to the financial sector in China.
The largest difference between Blockchain 1.0 and 2.0 should be smart contracts. Because of the
feature of the blockchain technology, smart contracts are a safe and secure technology which can be
adopted to stimulate innovation in many kinds of industries, such as supply-chain management, digital
healthcare management, finance, and business (Abhinav et al., 2021).
For the current Chinese stage, Blockchain 2.0, the main focus is on the financial sector. As the
combination of blockchain technology and the financial industry is bound to create more and more
156

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

business models, service scenarios, business processes and financial products, it has deep impact on the
development of financial markets, financial institutions, financial services, and financial formats. As
the smart contract is a feature of blockchain technology (Varfolomeev et al., 2021), it can be applied to
all transactions involving resources, movement of finance, material and people. This safe and reliable
smart contract feature will be helpful for effective tracking, visibility, security enhancement and cost
reduction in the overall business process (Abhinav et al., 2021).
Due to the disintermediation, secure encryption, the transparent and immutable nature of the distributed ledger with blockchain technology, the application of blockchain technology in China at the present
stage is mainly optimizing the original mechanism from the perspective of cost saving and efficiency
improvement. This coincides with the goal of transaction cost economics. The significant advantage
of reducing transaction costs has been gradually reflected in financial services, supply chain management, and the Internet of Things, with financial services being the most significant. The application of
blockchain technology in China brings cost reduction for market transactions and a material impact on
corporate performance in a highly emotionally volatile market (Cioroianu et al., 2021).
Benefiting from the Chinese government’s strong support via beneficial policies and laws as well
as the massive capital investment from Chinese private equity investors, China has been one of the
pacemakers in the global blockchain application field. So it is significant to do deep researches to find
out the proved advantages that can be learned from to harness the sustainability of digital finance, since
there is a high possibility for China to be the first to enter the stage of Blockchain 3.0 in the whole world.
Through the study of China’s policy changes and the analysis of success and failure cases in the
corresponding period of policy promulgation, this paper gives some specific and feasible suggestions
for countries like China to develop policy oriented blockchain application. This paper studies previous
literatures in the West and China and finds that there is almost no literature to analyze China’s blockchain
application from the perspective of policy change, which is an academic gap that this paper can fill. Few
papers systematically analyzed the reason for the success of the mature and typical applications in China.
The paper is to fill in the blanks in this field. The paper is to help the countries or companies who want
to use Chinese experience for example understand faster of the characteristics, impact of institutional
change, and specific blockchain applications in China.
This chapter introduces the characteristics of China’s blockchain-enabled technology in the financial
sector, then proceeds to the roles of government in assisting Chinese businesses in adopting blockchain
technology via institutional setting. By giving an overview of the relevant policies and their impact on
Blockchain technology, the institutional shaping by the Chinese government is shown. Through the
comparison and analysis of the cases in the fintech industry, this chapter then examines how and whether
digital transformation and other innovative technologies can drive new business models and create value
experiences for consumers and/or firms in China’s fintech industry. Then a variety of challenges and
opportunities is analyzed to draw a blueprint for Chinese blockchain development. The chapter ends by
providing some recommendations to the government for optimal Blockchain implementation.

CHARACTERISTICS OF CHINA’S BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED
TECHNOLOGY IN THE FINANCIAL SECTOR
With the Chinese socialist market economic system continuously developing and gradually reaching
maturity, some transaction modes and methods of the traditional financial model need to be improved
157

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

and optimized. The emergence and development of blockchain technology has a strong financial application background. Therefore, Chinese blockchain planning and constructing work closely focuses on
many financial applications such as digital currency, smart contracts, financial transactions, and other
financial areas with broad development prospects (Tang, 2019).
As shown in Figure 1 below, the distribution of blockchain services in China was highest in sectors
such as Government affairs and public services, in finance, logistics and supply chain. The chart below
also clearly shows the rapid development of fintech in financial institutes and is another strong evidence
that the current focus of Blockchain application in China is on the financial sector.
Figure 1. Proportion of firms of blockchain application by industry segment in China in 2021
Data source: 2021 China industry blockchain ecological map

Blockchain is the result of a P2P network distributed structure. Network accounting, smart contracts
and other technologies were developed on this basis. Therefore, blockchain technology has a certain
technical and application foundation. The application forms of blockchain technology include public
chains, private chains and alliance chains (Sanka et al., 2021). The important premise of blockchain
technology application is a broad industry consensus and the overall layout (Rong & Yu, 2020). Commercial banks’ compliance, legal, security and other departments still have strong doubts about the
large-scale application of blockchain technology. At present, the application of this technology in the
field of commercial banks is mainly in corporate asset and intermediate business.
First, blockchain technology in commercial banks is mainly applied for corporate business. The application for retail business faces more difficulties compared to corporate business. The use of blockchain
technology can give more security and transparency for consumers when it comes to the application
of retail business: By optimizing logistics costs, facilitating freight tracking, building customer trust
and earning premium by tracking all supply chain data on the product and preventing counterfeiting by

158

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

retailers providing customers with information about the origin of their products at every step of the
supply chain. Nevertheless, Mu (2020) and other research members in Blockchain Research Group of
Digital Currency Research Institute of the People’s Bank of China said that Chinese current blockchain
technologies are not suitable for high concurrency scenarios such as traditional retail payments on the
account of many deficiencies in the initial stage of blockchain development in the finance sector in
China. For instance, the cost of data synchronization and verification increase and system processing
performance decreases with growing numbers of participating nodes.
In addition, in terms of functions, the decentralized feature of blockchain technology creates conflict
with the centralization requirements of China’s central bank. The Chinese government and law stipulate
that payment services provided by the central bank cannot be separated from centralized account arrangements and must be built on a centralized system. The decentralized feature of blockchain technology conflicts with the promulgation of Measures for the Administration of Online Payment Business of
Non-Bank Payment Institutions (2015) and the establishment of The Payment and Clearing Association
of China Working Committee on Bank Card Based Payment, Online Payment Application and Prepaid
Cards in Beijing (2011). Therefore, the application of retail business faces many difficulties, and the
current focus is on the corporate business (Mu et al., 2020). It is not recommended to transform the
traditional payment system into one based on blockchain at present.
Second, blockchain technology has a large application rate in the field of asset business. Applications in asset business include cross-border trade financing and supply chain financing (Zhang & Li,
2020). As is generally accepted in the industry, the cost for credit in the financial sector is relatively
high. Specifically, the cost and difficulty of building mutual trust are high. Blockchain can not only solve
the problem of trust in the financial system, but also reconstruct the order of financial business with its
characteristics of reliability, real-time, fault tolerance and traceability (Liu, S.P., 2019). For instance, the
securities industry, can achieve peer-to-peer securities issuance and trading with the help of blockchain
and thus greatly simplify the process.
Figure 2 and Figure 3 show the monthly blockchain transaction closing prices and volumes from
2016 to 2021. As the first graph illustrates, the closing price was 915.5577 Yuan in February 29, 2016
at the beginning of Blockchain listing on the Chinese stock market. Because of the rapid development
of blockchain in the Chinese financial sector, the stock price was also increasing fast in the first quarter
after it was issued. And when the investment fever died down, the closing price started falling for more
than one year until the end of 2018. Then the closing price of Blockchain began to recover and with the
introduction of relevant policies, it gradually reached stability and provided some small opportunities
with its closing price of 887.5872 Yuan by August 29, 2021.

159

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

Figure 2. Blockchain transaction closing price (monthly) until August 29, 2021

Data source: Eastmoney Choice database

There is a clear rising trend of Blockchain as can be seen in Figure 2. From the monthly volume graph,
the blockchain transaction volume fluctuated between 2016 and 2019, when the Chinese government
and enterprises tried to receive and develop the relative applications and policies. After 2019, Chinese
Blockchain transaction started to rise and the transaction volume reached up to 2,974,392 million Yuan
in July of 2020. The explosive growth of blockchain technology applications in China not only stimulates the development of many entity industries, but also promotes the blockchain technology itself in
the securities industry sector.
Figure 3. Blockchain transaction volume (monthly) until August 29, 2021
Data source: Eastmoney Choice database

160

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

With the continuous development and progress as well as its integration with other financial technologies, the blockchain technology will gradually adapt to a variety of large-scale financial scenarios.
Third, blockchain technology helps commercial banks reduce costs and increase efficiency of intermediary business. Blockchain technology will help improve the efficiency of cross-border payment
business. To be specific, the banking sector can effectively reduce the risk of cross-border payment
and settlement and save payment costs through blockchain technology. The application of blockchain
technology has improved the efficiency of financial transactions and settlements and reduced the cost
of financial regulation.
The industrial development Blue Book “Regulatory Technology Blue Book: China Regulatory Technology Development Report (2020)” (Beijing Blockchain Technology Application Association, 2020)
states that the essence of fintech is finance. The integration of technology and finance has not changed
the essence of financial inter-temporal transactions and credit exchange. Risks existing in the financial
industry will be reflected in the fintech field and new risk characteristics will evolve.
Since the financial crisis of 2008, with the technological revolution of financial regulation, and as
regulatory requirements continue to rise, business models based on regulatory requirements needed adjustment and great advances have been made in financial technology innovation. Following the background
of the financial crisis in 2008, the nature of financial markets, services, and institutions is changing owing to new entrants’ disruptive and innovating technological practices (Gomber et al., 2017). Because of
these, the fintech generated with the change of global drivers of the value chain continuously stimulates
the business modes to adapt to the change of the economy in the future (Thurber, 2012).
As the financial services industry evolves and fintech constantly emerges and develops, the application
of RegTech in China will have the potential for beneficial outcomes for consumers and public welfare as
well as for regulatory and supervisory gains in the financial sector (Anagnostopoulos, 2018). RegTech is
a subclass of the financial technology sector that focuses on technologies that may facilitate the delivery
of regulatory requirements more effectively and effectively than existing capabilities. The rapid increase
of fintech motivates the demand of RegTech (Ernst & Young, 2016) and at the same time it can help
regulators better enforce prudential supervision of its financial institutions in order to strengthen the
application of blockchain technology in financial regulation in China.
The logic of blockchain technology applied in the field of financial scene and application has been
relatively clear. The relevant applications are being gradually and thoroughly explored, constantly adding scenarios and practice cases. With the support of policies, blockchain has been attracting attention
and welcomed in a period of rapid development (Xiao, 2018).
In terms of application scenarios, multiple application scenarios are explored and closely combined
with business requirements in the Chinese financial sector. The focus is on meeting potential market
needs and addressing financial industry pain points. Blockchain application scenarios mainly involve
supply chain finance, trade finance, insurance technology, cross-border payment, asset securitization and
other sectors, with respective proportion of 32.6%, 11.2%, 11.2%, 7.9%, 6.7% and 30.4%.

161

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

Figure 4. Chinese financial applications, 2020

Data source: Research Report on Blockchain Financial Application and Development in China (2020)

As shown in Fig. 4 above, the main application scenario of blockchain technology in Chinese financial
field is supply chain finance. The application proportion of this scenario reaches 33%, which is the highest
proportion. And no application scenario except supply chain finance accounts for more than 12%. This
shows that the current supply chain application is well established and that other scenarios still need to
be developed. This phenomenon may be due to the good performance of supply chain finance (SCF) in
utilizing for capital optimization and cost reduction in many industries (Yan et al., 2016), so that such
an application of blockchain technology is the hot spot of the financial field in China.
Apart from supply chain finance, only trade finance and insurance technology accounted for more
than 10% of the application scenarios, and both of them accounted for 11.2% of the application scenarios.
Applications accounting for more than 5% included cross-border payments (7.9%) and asset securitization (6.7%).

THE ROLES OF GOVERNMENT IN ASSISTING CHINESE BUSINESSES IN
ADOPTING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY VIA INSTITUTIONAL SETTING
Institutional settings influence economic development. As shown in Yu et al. (2018), “Institutions can
be defined by commonly known rules used to structure recurrent interaction situations that are endowed
with a sanctioning mechanism. Institutional theory looks at the deeper aspects of social structures
with a high level of resilience (Scott, 2008). North (1990) defined institutions as ‘the humanly devised
constraints that shape interaction’ and distinguished formal institutions created by entities such as the

162

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

government and public services from informal institutions such as social convention or customs and
implicit constraints. Economic activities are conducted under a certain institutional setting that define
the interest of each member in the marketplace and how they can be achieved and protected.”
Institutions are able to structure incentives in human exchange, whether political, social or economic
(Scott 2008). Boettke (2016) pointed out the immaturity of the research of managing incentives and critiqued the contemporary economic focus as a continuation of much of the thinking laid out by previous
mainline economists and Nobel Prize winners in his speech delivered in Southern Economic Association Meetings. “The existence of imperfect information and constraints on governments means there is
a perpetual need for institutions to be crafted, tested and adapted in practice to ensure the effectiveness
of institutions in aligning incentives, metering performance and monitoring behaviors. As stated by
Boettke (2016), besides the rule of the general game in the society, there are consistent interactions
amongst the markets, firms, regulations, politics and the whole society, which could be referred to as
‘games within the games’ played inside the nested institutions of such a complex society. Scott (2008)
also stressed that institutions are subject to both incremental and discontinuous processes of movement,
in which the economic system’s performance could be modified.” (Yu et al, 2018) Thus, analyzing the
relevant policies and their impact on Blockchain technology, a better understanding of the institutional
framework as well as the roles of government in assisting Chinese businesses in adopting blockchain
technology via institutional setting can be realized. (Yu et al., 2018: 401).
With the transformation of the Internet of information to the Internet of value, Yang Lu (2021)
indicates that blockchain technology has entered the stage of scale application in China, so legislative
regulation and policy support of blockchain, in order to assist Chinese businesses in adopting blockchain
technology has become a new focus of the government. The rapid development of China’s blockchain
industry is inseparable from the attention of the government and the support of relevant policies (Wang
et al., 2020). In order to investigate the policy support behind the blockchain industry in China, Table 1
enumerates the relevant specific policies, laws and regulations promulgated by the nation and relevant
departments from 2013 to 2021, gives detailed policy content and summarizes their impact.
China is becoming strong and has been striving to be a leader in technological innovation. Having
been the first to promote 5G and artificial intelligence (AI), these technologies have by now been widely
promoted on a global scale. Now, China has done the same with blockchain, declaring the blockchain
technology as a national development priority and letting local governments implement their own blockchain policies and enforce blockchain standards.
In the second half of 2013, the bitcoin market rapidly heated up and the price rose rapidly, which
set off the first round of virtual currency investment boom in the world and drew wide attention from
society. At the same time, the financial risk that virtual currency may bring has caused the governments
of many countries to attach great importance to it. Since 2013, the Chinese government has issued
regulatory policies on virtual currency. For example, “the Notice on Preventing Risks of Bitcoin” was
issued, indicating that the management of Bitcoin Internet sites should be strengthened to prevent money
laundering risks that may be generated by Bitcoin.

163

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

Table 1. The summary of national blockchain policies in China 2013-2021
Issuing
date

Issuing departments

December 2013

People’s Bank of China, Ministry of
Industry and Information Technology,
China Banking Regulatory
Commission (CBRC)

“Notice on Bitcoin Risk
Prevention”

Clarified the nature of Bitcoin, required financial institutions
and payment institutions not to carry out bitcoin-related
businesses, and strengthened the management of Bitcoin
Internet sites.

2014

People’s Bank of China

Set up a special research
group on legal digital
currency

Plan to carry out the initial technical reserve and knowledge
accumulation to demonstrate the feasibility of the central
bank issuing legal digital currency.

2015

People’s Bank of China

Some key issues in the field
of digital currency were
investigated

The central bank commissioned a series of research reports
in the field of digital currency. For the first time, some
important new ideas are put forward, and suggestions such as
prohibiting ICO for policy supervision are proposed.

October 2016

Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology

“China Blockchain
Technology and Application
Development White Paper
(2016)”

Summarizes the development status and typical application
scenarios of blockchain at home and abroad, and introduces
the development roadmap of blockchain technology in China
and the standardization direction and process of blockchain
technology in the future

December 2016

State Council

“Notice of the State Council
on the issuance of the
‘13th Five-Year’ National
Informatization Plan”

New technologies such as blockchain are driving the
evolution of cyberspace from the interconnection of everyone
to the interconnection of everything.

Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology

“Circular of the Ministry of
Industry and Information
Technology on the issuance
of the Development Plan for
Software and Information
Technology Service Industry
(2016-2020)”

Key points of guidelines / signals issued by the Ministry of
industry and information technology to local governments
and local companies: Conducting research and development
in cutting-edge technologies;
Preemptively laying out and developing intelligent software;
Developing new service models and forms of business.

January 2017

General Office of the State Council

“Opinions of the General
Office of the State
Council on Innovating
Management, Improving
Services, Cultivating
and Strengthening New
Driving Forces of Economic
Development, and
Accelerating the Transition
Between Old and New
Driving Forces of Economic
Development”

Blockchain related policies: Innovating the system and
mechanism, break the management restrictions of institutions
and disciplines, and build several industrial innovation
centers and innovation networks in artificial intelligence,
blockchain, energy Internet, intelligent manufacturing, big
data application, genetic engineering, digital creativity and
other cross-integration fields.

January 2017

Ministry of Commerce, National
Development and Reform
Commission, Ministry of Land and
Resources, Ministry of Transport,
State Post Bureau

“Notice on the issuance
of the 13th Five-Year Plan
for the Development and
Development of Trade and
Goods”

Promoting the use of advanced technologies and equipment
such as automatic identification, electronic data interchange,
cargo tracking, intelligent transportation, and the Internet of
Things, exploring the application of blockchain technology
in the field of business logistics, and vigorously developing
smart logistics.

Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology

“Circular of the Ministry of
Industry and Information
Technology on the issuance
of the Three-Year Action
Plan for the Development
of Cloud Computing (20172019)”

Key points of guidelines / signals issued by the Ministry of
industry and information technology to local governments
and local companies: Supporting innovation and
entrepreneurship based on cloud computing.
Supporting small and medium-sized enterprises and
individual developers to carry out research, development and
industrialization of blockchain and other new technologies
and businesses based on cloud computing platform.

State Council

“Circular of the State
Council on the issuance
of the New Generation
of Artificial Intelligence
Development Plan”

Key points of guidelines / signals issued by the
Ministry of industry and information technology to
local governments and local companies: Promoting
the integration of blockchain technology and
artificial intelligence, establishing a new social
credit system, and minimizing the cost and risk of
interpersonal communication.

December 2016

March 2017

July 2017

Policies

Impact summaries
(Sources: the discussed Policies)

Continued on following page
164

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

Table 1. Continued
Issuing
date

Issuing departments

Policies

Impact summaries
(Sources: the discussed Policies)

August 2017

Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of
Finance

“Circular of the General
Office of the Ministry of
Commerce and the General
Office of the Ministry of
Finance on the Construction
of Supply Chain System”

Key points of guidelines / signals issued by the Ministry of
industry and information technology to local governments
and local companies: Supporting the innovation and
upgrading of the traceability system of core supply chain
enterprises.
Promoting the innovation and upgrading of the traceability
system.

September 2017

People’s Bank of China,
Office of the Central Cyberspace
Affairs Commission,
Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology,
State Administration for Market
Regulation,
China Insurance Regulatory
Commission,
China’s Securities Regulatory
Commission,
China’s Bank Regulatory
Commission

“Notice on Preventing the
Risk of Token Issuance
Financing”

Since the date of the announcement, various coin issuance
and financing activities shall be stopped.

China Insurance Regulatory
Commission

“Circular of CIRC on
Printing and Distributing the
‘Construction Plan of the
Second Generation Project of
Compensation’ ”

Key points of guidelines / signals issued by the Ministry of
industry and information technology to local governments
and local companies: Tracking the development trend
of financial technologies such as cloud computing, big
data, artificial intelligence and blockchain, carrying out
research on the application of regulatory technologies,
and actively exploring prudential supervision which is a
multidimensional, three-dimensional, open solvency risk
analysis and monitoring system of the insurance industry
under the conditions of new technologies.

General Office of the State Council

“Guiding Opinions of
the General Office of the
State Council on Actively
Promoting Innovation and
Application of Supply
Chain”

Key points of guidelines / signals issued by the Ministry of
industry and information technology to local governments
and local companies: Researching and utilizing emerging
technologies such as blockchain and artificial intelligence
to establish a credit evaluation mechanism based on supply
chain.

General Postal Office

“Guiding Opinions of State
Post Bureau on Promoting
the Construction of “One
Belt And One Road” in
Postal Service”

Key points of guidelines / signals issued by the Ministry of
industry and information technology to local governments
and local companies: Leveraging the role of national
engineering laboratories and other scientific research
institutions within the industry, exchanging experience
with countries along the Belt and Road on the integrated
development of the postal industry with the Internet, big
data, cloud computing, artificial intelligence and blockchain,
and jointly carrying out demonstrations of science and
technology application.

General Office of Ministry of
Industry and Information Technology

Circular of the General
Office of the Ministry of
Industry and Information
Technology on the
Application of the Pilot and
Demonstration Projects of
Information Consumption

Pilot demonstrations including the “10 directions in the
field of the 5 classes” (living, public service, industry, new
product, platform) Supporting the development of modern
logistics services for the whole process of information
consumption. Supporting the innovative application of
integrated logistics for multi-modal transport.

Ministry of Education

“Notice of the Ministry of
Education on the issuance
of the Action Plan for
Educational Informatization
2.0”

Actively exploring effective ways of recording, transferring,
exchanging, and certifying the effects of intelligent learning
based on new technologies such as blockchain and big data,
forming ubiquitous and intelligent learning systems, and
promoting the deep integration of information technology
and intelligent technology into the whole process of
education and teaching

September 2017

October 2017

December 2017

February 2018

April 2018

Continued on following page

165

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

Table 1. Continued
Issuing
date

Issuing departments

Policies

Impact summaries
(Sources: the discussed Policies)

May 2018

Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology

“China Blockchain Industry
White Paper 2018”

Deeply analyzes the development status of China’s
blockchain technology industry, summarizes the
development characteristics of China’s blockchain industry,
deeply expounds the application of blockchain in the
financial field and the real economy, and looks forward to
the development trend of the industry.

October 2018

Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology

“Notice of Ministry of
Industry and Information
Technology of China”

Actively building and improving the blockchain standard
system, accelerating the development, application and
promotion of key standards, and gradually building a perfect
standard system.

February 2019

Cyberspace Administration of China

“Blockchain Information
Service Management
Regulations”

It standardizes the development of China’s blockchain
industry, which means that China is officially ushered into
the “supervision era” for blockchain information services.

March 2019

Cyberspace Administration of China

“On the notice of the
first batch of domestic
blockchain information
service record number of the
announcement”

The first batch of blockchain information service names and
record numbers were publicly released.

May 2019

State Council

“Opinions on Deepening
Reform and Strengthening
Food Safety”

Promotes the application of blockchain and other
technologies in the field of food safety supervision.
New requirements and suggestions are put forward for the
food safety application of blockchain technology.

August 2019

State Council

“Opinions on Supporting
Shenzhen in Building a
Pilot Demonstration Zone
for Socialism with Chinese
Characteristics”

Supports the development of digital currency research and
innovative applications such as mobile payment in Shenzhen;
Promotes market access connectivity and mutual recognition
of financial (fund) products with Hong Kong and Macao;
Efforts are made to advance the internationalization of
the RMB and explore innovative cross-border financial
regulation.

October 2019

Standing Committee of the National
People’s Congress

“Code Law”

As a comprehensive and fundamental law in the field of
cryptography in China, it also has far-reaching and important
regulatory significance for blockchain technology.

February 2020

People’s Bank of China

“Technical security
specification for financial
distributed ledger”

The standard is the first block chain specification in domestic
and even international financial industry. It can be seen
that blockchain is increasingly becoming one of the core
technologies in the digital age. Meanwhile, it will also play a
foundational role in the further standardized, comprehensive,
and truly in-depth application of block chain in the financial
industry.

April 2020

National Internet Finance Association
of China

“Risk tips for participating
in speculation on overseas
virtual currency trading
platforms”

Clarifies that virtual currency transactions and ICOs are
illegal financial activities, defines clean-up and rectification
work.

July 2020

People’s Bank of China

“Notice to promote the
application of blockchain
technical specifications”
“Blockchain technology
financial application
evaluation rules”

The first block-chain related normative documents have been
issued by China’s top authority.

May 2021

National Internet Finance Association
of China, China Banking Association,
Payment & Clearing Association of
China

“Notice of the prevention
of virtual currency trading
speculation risk”

Formally bans all non-sovereign countries in the world to
give endorsement to virtual currencies in China. Announces
Crack-Down upon trading speculations of Bitcoin and other
virtual currencies in view of the production link of Bitcoin.

Source: Foresight Research Institute, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of the People’s Republic of China, the Chinese
Government Legal Information Website

166

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

In 2016, The State Council issued the “13th Five-Year National Information Plan”, for the first time
adding the blockchain technology into the scope of new technology and frontiers. This was a formal mark
of China beginning to promote the development of blockchain technology and application. Since then,
the central and local governments have respectively issued relevant regulatory or supportive policies,
creating a beneficial policy environment for the development of blockchain technology and industry.
As it shows in the figure below, the numbers of blockchain policies posted by Chinese government and
ministries increased from 1 item in 2015 to 21 items in 2019. There is a clear trend of gradual improvement and reliability for Chinese blockchain laws and policies.
Figure 5. Number of state-level blockchain policies

Data source: Eastmoney Choice database

By analyzing the institutional changes of Chinese national blockchain-related policies from 2013 to
2021, it is clear that the development of blockchain applications in China is strongly associated with the
attitude of the government. Two examples are the strict regulation of cryptocurrencies and banning the
Initial Coin Offering (ICO) (“Notice on Bitcoin Risk Prevention”, 2013) at the beginning stage of Chinese
blockchain applications in 2013.With the “Notice on Preventing the Risk of Token Issuance Financing”
(2017), any Chinese blockchain applications had been renormalized or prohibited from running.
From 2013 to 2017 we can discern the stage of building and improving the basic conditions for the
development of blockchain applications and issuing relevant normalizing and supporting policies such
as the “Set up a special research group on legal digital currency” (2014) researching central bank digital
currencies, the “Circular of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology on the issuance of
the Three-Year Action Plan for the Development of Cloud Computing (2017-2019)”(2017) addressing
basic technology like cloud computing and the “Circular of the General Office of the Ministry of Commerce and the General Office of the Ministry of Finance on the Construction of Supply Chain System”,
addressing supply chain issues.

167

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

The publication of the “China Blockchain Industry White Paper 2018” (2018) marks the institutional
change into the stage of substantial support and appreciation by continuous introduction of favorable
and standardized policies in the use of blockchain technology, for instance the issue of “Code Law”
(2019),“Technical security specification for financial distributed ledger”(2020) and “Notice of the prevention of virtual currency trading speculation risk”(2021). With the development wave, several enterprises
were able to develop rapidly into leaders in their fields, like our first case study, the Ant Group.
With the maturity and completeness of the regulatory policy of blockchain market and the further
improvement of blockchain technology, the construction of a regulatory system for the Chinese industry
has been further advanced, providing a strong guarantee for industrial block chain projects to deeply serve
the real economy. Some illegal projects will be strictly regulated, the market is becoming standardized,
and the environment for industrial development can be optimized.
From the perspective of supporting policy content, it can be divided into technical level, industrial
level, industrial application, and other levels (Wang, 2021).
In terms of technology, on the one hand, the Chinese government encourages innovative research, the
application of blockchain technology and emphasizes the need to speed up the formulation of blockchain
technology standard system; On the other hand, it encourages the integration, research, and application
of blockchain technology with big data, artificial intelligence, and other technologies in order to solve
social credit, cost, efficiency and other problems (Xi, J.P., 2019).
From the perspective of industry, the government encourages the establishment of the blockchain
industry guide fund. It also promotes the development of blockchain industry through special subsidies
for talents, technology innovation subsidies, office housing subsidies and other measures. The Chinese
government has issued a series of policies like the “Guidance on accelerating the application of blockchain technology and industrial development” (2021) to incubate blockchain projects and promote the
development of the blockchain industry.
At the application level, the government mainly encourages and supports the deep integration of
blockchain technology with finance, supply chain, cross-border e-commerce, supply chain finance, logistics, public welfare, agriculture, government, and other industries (Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology of the People’s Republic of China, 2018).
In general, the Chinese government encourages the exploration and research of blockchain technology
standards and technology security applications to promote the combination of blockchain technology
and practical application scenarios in order to serve the real economy and build a new digital economy;
However, the potential risks of digital currency or ICO have not been addressed so far. The next section
will further discuss the latest Chinese cases.

DISCUSSION OF CHINESE CASES (ANALYZING AND COMPARING
SUCCESSFUL AND UNSUCCESSFUL CASES)
Blockchain, as a technology of digital finance, is rapidly entering social governance, enterprise production and the lives of people. The most important application areas of blockchain can be divided into three
levels: the first level is the application of blockchain in financial business, such as clearing, exchange
and reconciliation. The second level is how blockchain technology, as the underpinning of fintech development, can effectively empower other platforms and capabilities. The third level is the scene and

168

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

ecology, implying all the elements related to the industrial ecology on the chain in order for the whole
ecology to operate effectively (University Big Data and Artificial Intelligence Promotion Alliance, 2021).
When it comes to China, the application of blockchain in supply chain finance, cross-border payment, asset securitization, bills, credit investigation and risk management has begun to show a colorful
bloom. By solving the problems of information asymmetry, intermediary centralization and “information
islands”, the application of blockchain technology in China can greatly improve the breadth, depth, and
efficiency of traditional financial business.
As a solution to information and cost problems, some new business categories based on blockchain
begin to appear in the core and the margins of traditional financial business. It can be said that blockchain
is profoundly impacting the application of financial business in China. In this paper, several successful
and unsuccessful cases of Chinese blockchain technology application will be introduced and discussed.

1. The Successful and Most Typical Case——Ant Group
As shown in the figure below, the bar chart compares the most-funded Chinese fintech and blockchain
startups in 2020. With the funding of Ant Group having reached 22 billion U.S. dollars, this is the mostfunded FinTech enterprise in China. Its funders included General Atlantic, Sequoia Capital, and others
(CrunchBase & SCMP, 2020). And most funding is due to the Ant Group’s great business conditions
and development prospects in online financial service. Just like the rapid rise and success of Ant Group,
the combination of blockchain technology and Chinese financial sector has given many investors great
prospects for development. At the same time, the resulting additional investment will accelerate the
development and further application Chinese fintech and blockchain technology, so as to enter the stage
of Blockchain 3.0 earlier.
Figure 6. Most funded Chinese fintech and blockchain startups 2020 (in Million U.S. Dollars)
Data source: Statista, CrunchBase, SCMP

169

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

The Ant Group is the parent of mobile payment platform——Alipay, which is also the world’s leading financial technology opening platform, committed to science and technology promotion, including
financial services, modern service industry and global digitalization (Ant Group website, online). The
reasons why the Ant Group became the largest fintech company in China are interesting lessons and a
reference for not only many start-up Chinese companies based on blockchain applications in finance
(CBRC General Office, 2021), but also every other company.
Firstly, the success of Ant Group is mainly owing to its product research and user acceptation. The
Ant Group has done well in the application of blockchain technology in the financial sector such as
digital payment, digital finance, and digital life. The digital mobile payment Alipay, is not only a means
of digital payment for users, but also a digital financial service (Ant Group Co. Ltd, 2020). Digital payment has become the infrastructure of consumers’ daily life and digital finances (Li et al., 2021). As
Figure 6 shows, the number of monthly active users of Alipay APP have risen continuously from 499
million people in 2017 to 711 million users in 2020. The growing number of monthly users and the
growing users’ retention rate is the reason for the Ant Groups’ growth and especially important for the
development, survival and growth of fintech companies.
Figure 7. Monthly active user of Alipay APP (Million people)

Data source: Prospectus of Ant Technology Group Co. Ltd

Meanwhile, digital financial services are highly innovative and attractive, and have high synergies
with digital payment and digital lifestyle services such as online living payment platform and e-marriage
certificate. Digital payment, lifestyles based on the Internet and various digital technology applications
and digital financial services form a powerful synergy and a virtuous cycle, which is an important driving force for the growth of Ant Group.
The second important reason is the Ant Group’s technological innovation and its active application
of blockchain-authorized patents as well as the awareness of patent protection. Ant Group as a global

170

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

technology leader constantly innovates its technology and applications, stays open to sharing with the
whole industry especially in the fields of Blockchain, IoT technology, Database, AI and Regtech. For
blockchain technology applications, Ant Chain is an internationally leading financial alliance blockchain
platform which is independently developed by the Ant Group. With its high performance, high reliability
and high security, Ant Chain can support super-scale applications of 1 billion accounts * and1 billion
daily transactions (Ant Group website, online). For example, in June 2018, AlipayHK launched the
world’s first cross-border blockchain remittance service together with Philippine e-wallet GCash (China
Strategic Emerging Industry, 2018), providing convenient, safe, transparent and low-cost remittance
services for Hong Kong and Philippine residents. Based on deep research and the blockchain technology, Ant Group was able to increase the strength of its technology as well as open provide additional
markets and cooperation.
When it comes the patents, it attaches great importance to protect its technological achievements.
This is also why Ant Group as the largest fintech company in China can also play an important role in
the word. In the global list of authorized blockchain patents of Figure 8, Alipay ranks first globally with
212 blockchain authorized patents, followed by IBM (136) and Coinplug (107).
Figure 8. Ranking of global patent holders in the number of blockchain patents granted 2020
Data source: 《2020 Global Patent Authorization report in blockchain field》

171

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

Figure 9. Chinese blockchain patent disclosure rankings 2019

Data source: Eastmoney Choice database

As the Chinese blockchain patent disclosure rankings of 2019 show in the Figure 9, the Ant Group
was still the most active company of blockchain patent disclosure, with 241 patents, 52 more than the
second company in blockchain sector of China.
The authorization and disclosure of the patent means that the blockchain patent has gone through a
number of steps such as preliminary review, public review and substantive review (China Patent Protection Association, 2020), which can better reflect the “gold content” of the enterprise technology. Ant
group’s patent advantages are representative and typical and can thus be used to measure the technological progress of the industry and the R & D strength of the enterprise.
The other main advantage that makes the Ant Group the largest blockchain company in China is its
product launch as well as the development of a company in line with the demand of Chinese national
which seizes the market opportunity.
Chinese GDP is continuously growing, and China is gradually transforming to a consumption-oriented
economy. The COVID-19 pandemic has further pushed digital transformation in China. In 2020, about
40.7 percent of the value added in the tertiary industry was contributed by the digital economy, such as
remote working, online education, and online entertainment which accelerates the Chinese transition to
a consumption-based economy as it is illustrated in the Figure 10. Meanwhile, as the Figure 11 shows,
the digital economy has gained a more important role in Chinese economic growth, contributing about
38.6 percent of the country’s GDP that year.

172

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

Figure 10. Value added share of digital economy in China from 2016 to 2020, by industry

Data source:(CAICT 2021, p. 7)

Figure 11. Share of the digital economy in the GDP of China from 2015 to 2020
Data source:(CAICT 2021, p. 6)

Moreover, China has entered a brand-new digital era and the digital economy is developing rapidly.
In 2020, the economy reached a size of about 39.2 trillion Yuan, registering a nominal annual growth of
9.7 percent, much higher than the country’s nominal GDP growth at 6.7 percent. Amid the COVID-19

173

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

pandemic, more and more companies have opted for digitization solutions for business operations. In
many ways, China is the vanguard of the global fintech industry, with tech giants, such as Alibaba,
bringing digital financial services to over one billion consumers.
Figure 12. Market size of the digital economy in China in selected years from 2005 to 2020 (in Trillion
Yuan)
Data source: Statista

In response to China’s national conditions and policies for the development of digital economy and
fintech related technologies, the need of consumption transformation, the rapid growth of Ant Group
conforms to the trend of development of the digital economy, for instance the applications of the digital
mobile payment Alipay, the small and micro lending platform Ant Credit Pay, and the financial management technology platform Yu’E Bao.
Moreover, policy support and subsidies of Chinese government in order to vigorously develop the
digital economy, large upfront capital investments, as well as a healthy and profitable business model
are the indispensable advantages for Ant Group to become the largest fintech enterprise in China.

2. Successful Case——Chinese First ABS Supply Chain
The application of blockchain technology in asset securitization business has provided convenience for
capital parties to understand the underlying assets, intermediaries to grasp the default risk of assets in
real time, and regulators to effectively monitor financial leverage and prevent systemic risks in advance.
The “Deppon Securities and Zheshang Bank ChiRong No. 2 Asset Support Special Plan” ABS was
successfully issued in Shenzhen Stock Exchange. The size of its issue was 336 million Yuan, and the
underlying assets are trade financing. It is worth noting that this product was not only successfully ap-

174

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

plied the blockchain technology, but also was the first blockchain financial ABS product in supply chain
(PuHuiMingYan Financial Research Institute, 2018).
The ABS is jointly created by Zhesang Bank and Deppon Securities. It is the first securitization
project of the stowed-shelf type of trade financing receivables. Its basic assets cover four kinds of trade
financing receivables: domestic letter of credit assets, bank payment guarantee assets, electronic bank
acceptance bill assets, and electronic commercial acceptance bill assets. The asset-backed securities of
each period under the shelf mode of this product are not classified as priority or inferior, and all grades
have obtained the initial AAA rating of China Credit (Flush Finance, 2020).

3. Unsuccessful Case——Cloud Currency Network
With the appearance and rapid development of cryptocurrency, the ICO market experienced phenomenal
growth in the last years (Bollaert et al., 2021). The Figure 13 shows that many national and regional
governments focused on the ICO. The complete repel of the cloud currency network on August 31, this
is one of the unsuccessful cases in Chinese blockchain technology related to cryptocurrency for the most
important reason - the influence of National policy.
Figure 13. Countries with most research into state-sponsored interbank cryptocurrency 2020
Data source: BIS, PWC

On July 16, 2018, the cloud currency network announced that under the guidance and supervision
of the “Beijing Internet financial risk special rectification work leading group”, it carried out the digital
currency liquidation work on September 5, 2017 (TechWeb Report, 2018). After BTC China announced

175

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

the closure of virtual currency transactions, the cloud currency network also announced that it will close
all virtual currency transactions on September 20. In the announcement, the cloud currency network
said that it will permanently close all kinds of trading functions at 00:00 on September 20, 2017 and has
stopped new user registration and RMB recharge business in order to cater to China’s Internet financial
risks special rectification work (TechWeb Report, 2018).
Comparing the last two case of blockchain technology’s financial application in China, there are
many lessons to be learned mainly in the four fields: policy, capital, industry, sustainability. First, in
terms of policy, which is the most significant factor, analysing the feasibility of blockchain application
is necessary. In the unsuccessful case of the cloud currency network, we show that the feature of the
application violates the attitude of the Chinese government towards cryptocurrency - the national policy
forbids the trade of cryptocurrency and ICO in Mainland China. That was the main reason of the cloud
currency network’s complete repel. In the successful cases like the ABS product in China, the Chinese
government supports the combination of blockchain and asset securitization. The success is also due to
its large capital input on the scale of Hundred Million of Yuan, the new potentially increasing importance
of the security industry and the strong sustainability of its reliable and cost-reducing features as well as
filling up the gaps of trust and liquidity in the field of asset securitization.

OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES FOR CHINESE COMPANIES IN
INTEGRATING BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED TECHNOLOGY IN BUSINESS SECTOR
Opportunities
1.

In the term of production and trade, blockchain can help develop sustainable supply chains (Kshetri,
2021) in order to support many manufacturing enterprises. It has also been introduced and employed
in many traditional industries, such as supply chain finance, production management, logistics, and
the Internet of Things, to optimize their operation processes (Jiang et al, 2021).

Meanwhile, China is looking for new export locations in Europe, the Middle East and Africa through
the Silk Road Economic Belt. Having advanced blockchain technology will give China huge trading
opportunities when it comes to dealing with emerging technology markets.
2.
3.

From the perspective of regulation in the Business Sector, Blockchain can address institutional deficiencies to implement sustainability, make the society stable and efficient. Moreover, Blockchain
can reduce fake and low-quality ingredient products in supply chains (Sunny, J. et al., 2020).
In the term of new applications, the recent applications of blockchain technology in crowdfunding
promise a possible solution to current obstacles and may facilitate socially oriented crowdfunding
platforms (Nguyen et al., 2021).

Furthermore, the digital RMB (Chinese CBDC) could become a global currency. China is going full
tilt into digital assets. As part of this, they are developing digital currency electronic payment platforms.
It’s planned to promote a central bank digital currency that the People’s Bank of China has issued, with
the anonymity in transactions and extensive crypto services in order to promote the new digital RMB
176

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

as a global currency. The RMB in its current form lacks openness and liquidity in international foreign
exchange markets (Tao Liu et al., 2019), so there is definitely room for improvement. With this new
digital RMB, China will be able to make cross-border payments at lower cost and faster.
In addition, automated functions using smart contracts will provide easier liquidity management and
transaction efficiency (Umer et al., 2021), and eventually allow the digital RMB to serve as an upgraded
version of the current M0, or cash in circulation.

Challenges
1.

First, technical hurdles remain. Financial businesses attach importance to privacy protection (Hao
Wang et al., 2020). Under the current consensus mechanism, some sensitive information is transparent and visible, but lacks privacy. Blockchain technology involves many interdisciplinary and
cross-field technologies such as cryptography, informatics, artificial intelligence, and computer.
The technologies in these different fields are closely linked, and the research and development is
extremely difficult with extreme development costs.

Moreover, the underlying technology is at risk of being attacked, and the speed of reaching consensus is
relatively slow. The exponential adoption of blockchain puts higher demands on the underlying technology (Zhang & Li, 2020).
2.

3.

4.

5.

Second, the impact on the global economy is unclear (Xiao, 2018). Currently, there are insufficient
assessments of the short and long-term economic impacts of blockchain technology. At present, it
is still difficult for blockchain architecture to meet the requirements of financial system availability
and business continuity. Trust mechanisms and data preservation methods still need to be accepted
and recognized by mainstream financial institutions. In addition, the ecosystem is still relatively
underdeveloped. A sound technical standard of the blockchain system has not yet been established
globally, which leads to the lack of convincing practical data and affects the orderly development
of the blockchain ecosystem.
Thirdly, the technology lacks universal rules, and the application scene is segmented. At present,
there is no unified industry norm and regulatory norm for the application of blockchain technology (Zhang & Li, 2020). Regulatory policy in China remains murky. The government’s policies
and effective supervision restrict the sustainable development of blockchain to some extent. Due
to the lack of effective supervision, the authenticity and integrity of the pre-chain data cannot be
guaranteed. When the blockchain technology is used for the traceability of various assets, it is difficult to truly form a closed loop to reduce risks and reduce speculation (Xiao, 2018), and the risk
of potential losses due to information distortion or distortion exist.
Fourthly, the application of commercial banks should consider the “double-sided” nature of blockchain
technology (Zhang & Li, 2020). At present, the starting point of commercial banks’ application of
blockchain technology is to reduce costs, and the profit point is not clear. Major commercial banks
in China have already made various trials such as asset custody system and cross-border clearing
and settlement in field of blockchain, but most of them are still in the exploratory stage and have
not yet entered the stage of large-scale commercial application.
Fifthly, in the blockchain, all smart contracts have been coded in advance and automatically executed. Normally, the basic transaction execution has no problem, but in the case of special complex
177

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

transactions, there may be some deviation from the user’s understanding, which will bring losses
to the user. At the same time, there is uncertainty in blockchain smart contract (Upadhyay et al.,
2021), Turing smart contracts are too flexible, and once loopholes are exploited, this will cause
irreparable losses. On the other hand, the tamper-proof feature of blockchain will also form some
obstacles to business logic correction and contract upgrade.

CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Since 2008, blockchain has a global experience development of 13 years. Chinese blockchain national
policy has improved since the beginnings, the industry application standards are gradually established and
the development is directed from technology leading into market penetration. Meanwhile, the integration
of blockchain applications in finance, supply chain, government and other fields is being implemented,
and the industrial scale will show rapid growth. However, the current development of Blockchain in
China still faces many problems which need to be considered closely. For instance, core technology
independent innovation capacity still needs to be strengthened, security and privacy issues should be
continuously focused on, the talent gap needs to be improved, and ecological integration application
scenarios also need to be further explored.
Since it is the central banking system which strengthens the central bank’s macro-control function
and improves the management system in Chinese financial sector, the government plays a primary role
in the promotion of blockchain applications. Following areas and issues still need to be addressed by
the regulating bodies to mitigate the risks of blockchain:
1.

2.

3.

178

Strengthen supervision and continuously follow (Long et al., 2019). The Chinese government should
focus on the impact and challenges that the application of blockchain technology in the financial
sector may bring to the existing legal system and regulatory framework and then build up a sound
and efficient financial supervision mechanism. Illegal acts and disturbances that violate the law of
technological development and damage the financial order should be strictly punished.
The Chinese blockchain application industry should improve its technological innovation capacity. Chinese government should play a catalytic role in encouraging innovative research and application of blockchain technology by applying the “regulatory sandbox” mechanism to enable
blockchain financial products and services to better participate in the development process of the
micro-market. Meanwhile the Government should strive to build an independent and controllable
blockchain development ecosystem with strong innovation capabilities (Xiao, 2018). Furthermore,
the development of major commercial banks, insurance and securities institutions should be accelerated, and the potential risks and deficiencies of blockchain financial products and services in
transactions should be effectively recorded in order to take measures to control them.
Increasing capital investment and setting up special funds to promote the research and development of blockchain basic theory and core technology is also a way to facilitate the development
of blockchain. It is necessary to closely integrate industrial application scenarios, conquer key
core technologies, accelerate the deep integration of blockchain with various economic and social
fields and industries, then encourage the creation of blockchain integrated application and industrial development clusters (CCID Industry and Information Research Institute, 2021). All parties
should actively carry out pilot and demonstration work on blockchain application under Chinese

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

“new infrastructure”. The financial market should promote the deep integration of blockchain with
artificial intelligence, big data, 5G and cloud computing.
Chinese national and regional governments should also actively carry out pilot demonstration work
of new infrastructure applications based on blockchain and set up typical industry cases for demonstration effects. At the same time, improving the application level of blockchain technology in other real
economy fields is also needed and using it to jointly promote the development of Chinese digital economy.
4.

For introducing new policies and action plans by the government, the mode of public-private
collaboration has shown positive effects. The attitude of the government should remain active in
order to support the rapid development of blockchain technology since various advanced applications need to be endorsement by the People’s Bank of China which also has a role of monitor
and coordination. The next step for the government of China is to facilitate communications and
negotiations with academia (the experts and professionals) and business (private enterprises of
blockchain applications). By way of this three-parties communication, it can further accelerate the
in-depth development of blockchain applications with relevant and precise policies support from
the government, state-of-the-art academic researches and findings from experts and professionals, capital and specific production support from enterprises. This enables building a blockchain
technology-based digital ecosystem which will contribute to sustainable development of the digital
economy by including government-backed application, continuous innovation ability and adequate
funding and support.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors extend sincere gratitude to:
•
•
•

The Editor-in-Chief and International Editorial Advisory Board (IEAB) of this book who initially
desk reviewed, arranged a rigorous double/triple blind review process and conducted a thorough,
minute and critical final review before accepting the chapter for publication.
All anonymous reviewers who provided very constructive feedbacks for thorough revision, improvement, extension and finetuning of the chapter.
All colleagues, assistants and well-wishers who assisted the authors to complete this task.

REFERENCES
Albayati, H., Kim, S. K., & Rho, J. J. (2021). Accepting financial transactions using blockchain technology and cryptocurrency: A customer perspective approach. Technology in Society, 62, 101320.
doi:10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101320

179

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

Anagnostopoulos, I. (2018). Fintech and Regtech: Impact on regulators and banks. Journal of Economics
and Business, 100, 7–25. doi:10.1016/j.jeconbus.2018.07.003
Ant Group Co. Ltd. (2020). Prospectus of Ant Technology Group Co. Ltd. Available online: https://
www.antgroup.com
Beck, R., & Müller-Bloch, C. (2017). Blockchain as radical innovation: a framework for engaging with
distributed ledgers. Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
5390–5399.
Beijing Blockchain Technology Application Association. (2020). Regulatory Technology Blue Book:
China Regulatory Technology Development Report (2020). Author.
Bing, T. (2019). The application prospect of blockchain technology in the financial industry. People
Venture Blockchain.
BIS. PWC. (2020). Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDC) interbank or wholesale projects that are
furthest in their development as of 2020, by country. PwC CBDC Global Index. Retrieved from: https://
www.statista.com/statistics/1229776/countries-with-most-mature-interbank-cbdg-worldwide/
Boettke, P. (2016). Special Collections at the GMU Library – October is Nobel Celebration Month |
Main | 2016 Southern Economic Association Meetings. https://www.coordinationproblem.org/2016/10/
and-the-nobel-goes-to-oliver-hart-and-bengt-holmstrom.html
Bollaert, H., de Silanes, F. L., & Schwienbacher, A. (2021). Fintech and access to finance. Journal of
Corporate Finance, 68, 101941. Advance online publication. doi:10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2021.101941
CAICT. (2021a). Market size of the digital economy in China in selected years from 2005 to 2020.
White Paper on China’s Digital Economy Development. Retrieved from: https://www.statista.com/
statistics/1250080/china-digital-economy-size/
CAICT. (2021b). Share of the digital economy in the GDP of China from 2015 to 2020. White Paper on
China’s Digital Economy Development. Retrieved from: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1250092/
china-digital-economy-gdp-share/
CAICT. (2021c). Value added share of digital economy in China from 2016 to 2020, by industry. White
Paper on China’s Digital Economy Development. Retrieved from: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1250100/china-digital-economy-penetration-rate-by-industry/
CBRC General Office. (2021). Notice on further promoting the high-quality development of financial services for small and micro enterprises in 2021. Retrieved from: http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/
zhengceku/2021-04/26/content_5602140.htm
CCID Industry and Information Research Institute. (2021). Blockchain development trends in China in
2021. Retrieved from: https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=1693991735268111467&wfr=spider&for=pc
China Insurance Regulatory Commission. (2017). Circular of CIRC on Printing and Distributing the
‘Construction Plan of the Second Generation Project of Compensation’. Retrieved from: http://www.
gov.cn/xinwen/2017-09/20/content_5226368.htm

180

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

China Patent Protection Association. (2020). 2020 Global Patent Authorization report in blockchain
field. Retrieved from: http://www.199it.com/archives/1077801.html
China Strategic Emerging Industry. (2018). The world’s first cross-border blockchain remittance was
born in Hong Kong. China Strategic Emerging Industry, 14, 12–13.
Chinese IoT Blockchain Branch. (2021). 2021 China industry blockchain ecological map. Retrieved
from: https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/zkwrOTSFPaM74pW5bUO_hg
Cioroianu, I., Corbet, S., & Larkin, C. (2021). The differential impact of corporate blockchain-development as conditioned by sentiment and financial desperation. Journal of Corporate Finance, 66, 101814.
doi:10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2020.101814
Cong, L. W., & He, Z. (2019). Blockchain disruption and smart contracts. Review of Financial Studies,
32(5), 1754–1797. doi:10.1093/rfs/hhz007
CrunchBase, SCMP. (2020). Total funding of the leading fintech and blockchain startups in China as of
June 2020 (in million U.S. dollars). China internet report 2020.
Cyberspace Administration of China. (2019). Blockchain Information Service Management Regulations.
Retrieved from: http://www.cac.gov.cn/2019-01/10/c_1123971164.htm
Cyberspace Administration of China. (2019). On the notice of the first batch of domestic blockchain
information service record number of the announcement. Retrieved from: http://www.cac.gov.cn/201903/30/c_1124305122.htm?from=singlemessage&isappinstalled=0
Eastmoney Choice database. (2021). Retrieved from: http://choice.eastmoney.com/
Ernst & Young. (2016). UK FinTech census: The voice of FinTech, HM treasury. EY and Innovate Finance. Retrieved from: http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY-UK-FinTechCensus-2017/$FILE/
EY-UK-FinTech-Census-2017.pdf
Finance, F. (2020). Fintech helps securities business transform and restructure. China Securities Journal.
Retrieved from: https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=1654762300223125200&wfr=spider&for=pc
General Office of Ministry of Industry and Information Technology. (2018).“Circular of the General
Office of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology on the Application of the Pilot and
Demonstration Projects of Information Consumption. Retrieved from: http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/
zhengceku/2021-03/04/content_5590162.htm
General Office of the State Council. (2017). Guiding Opinions of the General Office of the State Council
on Actively Promoting Innovation and Application of Supply Chain. Retrieved from: http://www.gov.cn/
zhengce/content/2017-10/13/content_5231524.htm
General Office of the State Council. (2017). Opinions of the General Office of the State Council on Innovating Management, Improving Services, Cultivating and Strengthening New Driving Forces of Economic Development, and Accelerating the Transition Between Old and New Driving Forces of Economic
Development. Retrieved from: http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2017-01/20/content_5161614.htm

181

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

General Postal Office. (2017). Guiding Opinions of State Post Bureau on Promoting the Construction of
“One Belt And One Road” in Postal Service. Retrieved from: http://www.spb.gov.cn/zc/flfgjzc_1/201801/
t20180112_1467509.html
Gomber, P., Koch, J. A., & Siering, M. (2017). Digital Finance and FinTech: Current research and future
research directions. Journal of Business Economics, 87(5), 537–580. doi:10.100711573-017-0852-x
Guo, Y. M., Huang, Z. L., Guo, J., Guo, X.-R., Li, H., Liu, M.-Y., Ezzeddine, S., & Nkeli, M. J. (2021).
A bibliometric analysis and visualization of blockchain. Future Generation Computer Systems, 116,
316–332. doi:10.1016/j.future.2020.10.023
Hao, W., Ma, S.L., Dai, H.N., Imran, M., & Wang, T.S. (2020). Blockchain-based data privacy management with Nudge theory in open banking. Future Generation Computer Systems, 110.
Jiang, S. R., Li, Y. Z., Wang, S. Y., & Lin, Z. (2021). Blockchain competition: The tradeoff between
platform stability and efficiency. European Journal of Operational Research. Advance online publication. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2021.05.031
Kshetri, N. (2021). Blockchain and sustainable supply chain management in developing countries.
International Journal of Information Management, 60, 102376. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2021.102376
Li, L., Freeman, G., & Wohn, D. Y. (2021). The Interplay of Financial Exchanges and Offline Interpersonal Relationships through Digital Peer-to-Peer Payments. Telematics and Informatics, 63, 63.
doi:10.1016/j.tele.2021.101671
Liu, S. P. (2019). Digital Economy New Engine (Blockchain Technology) Innovation Application Summit. Retrieved from: https://www.cebnet.com.cn/20190419/102566686.html
Liu, T., Wang, X., & Woo, W. T. (2019). The road to currency internationalization: Global perspectives
and Chinese experience. Emerging Markets Review, 38, 38. doi:10.1016/j.ememar.2018.11.003
Long, Y. A., Zhang, J., & Ai, R. (2019). Research on supply chain finance System Optimization based
on Blockchain Technology. Southwest Finance, 2019(1), 74–81.
Lu, Y. (2021). Consistency, breakthrough and structure of the blockchain regulation in China. Journal
of Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 2, 24–36.
Majeed, U. K., Khan, L. U., Yaqoob, I., Kazmi, S. M. A., Salah, K., & Hong, C. S. (2021). Blockchain
for IoT-based smart cities: Recent advances, requirements, and future challenges. Journal of Network
and Computer Applications, 181, 103007. doi:10.1016/j.jnca.2021.103007
Ministry of Commerce, the National Development and Reform Commission, the Ministry of Land and
Resources, the Ministry of Transport & the State Post Bureau. (2017). Notice on the issuance of the 13th
Five-Year Plan for the Development and Development of Trade and Goods. Retrieved from: http://www.
mofcom.gov.cn/article/b/d/201702/20170202511705.shtml
Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Finance. (2017). Circular of the General Office of the Ministry
of Commerce and the General Office of the Ministry of Finance on the Construction of Supply Chain
System. Retrieved from: http://www.mofcom.gov.cn/article/h/redht/201708/20170802627302.shtml

182

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

Ministry of Education. (2018). Notice of the Ministry of Education on the issuance of the Action Plan
for Educational Informatization 2.0. Retrieved from: http://www.moe.gov.cn/srcsite/A16/s3342/201804/
t20180425_334188.html
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology. (2016a). China Blockchain Technology and Application Development White Paper (2016). Retrieved from: http://www.shujuju.cn/lecture/detail/2134
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology. (2016b). Circular of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology on the issuance of the Development Plan for Software and Information Technology
Service Industry (2016-2020). Retrieved from: http://www.cac.gov.cn/2017-01/17/c_1120330752.htm
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology. (2017). Circular of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology on the issuance of the Three-Year Action Plan for the Development of Cloud Computing
(2017-2019). Retrieved from: https://www.miit.gov.cn/jgsj/xxjsfzs/zlgh/art/2020/art_fb1e14b54f234fc7b4f52c062b9d3d08.html
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology. (2018a). Notice of Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of China. Retrieved from: https://www.miit.gov.cn/jgsj/xxjsfzs/gzdt/art/2020/art_ebe80855c8234ba7bd1b7cf7ffee5813.html
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology. (2018b). China Blockchain Technology and Application Development White Paper (2018). Retrieved from: https://www.miit.gov.cn/n1146290/n1146402/
n1146445/c6180238/part/6180297.pdf
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of the People’s Republic of China. (2018). White Paper
on China’s Blockchain Industry 2018. Retrieved from: https://www.miit.gov.cn/n1146290/n1146402/
n1146445/c6180238/part/6180297.pdf
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, Office of the Central Cyberspace Affairs Commission.
(2021). Guidance on accelerating the application of blockchain technology and industrial development.
Joint Letter Of Ministry of Industry and Information Technology.
Mu, Geng, Lv, Qian, & Qing. (2020). Blockchain research Group of Digital Currency Research Institute,
People’s Bank of China: Existing blockchains are not suitable for high concurrency scenarios such as
traditional retail payments. Chinese Finance, 4.
National Internet Finance Association of China. (2020a). Risk tips for participating in speculation on
overseas virtual currency trading platforms. Retrieved from: https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=166282
8395598126938&wfr=spider&for=pc
National Internet Finance Association of China. (2020b). Research Report on Blockchain Financial
Application and Development in China. Retrieved from: https://wenku.baidu.com/view/0193c7d6b636
0b4c2e3f5727a5e9856a5712267e.html
National Internet Finance Association of China, China Banking Association, Payment & Clearing Association of China. (2021). Notice of the prevention of virtual currency trading speculation risk. Retrieved
from: https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=1700098234762596743&wfr=spider&for=pc

183

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

Nguyen, L. T. Q., Hoang, T. G., Do, L. H., Ngo, X. T., Nguyen, P. H. T., Nguyen, G. D. L., & Nguyend,
G. N. T. (2021). The role of blockchain technology-based social crowdfunding in advancing social value
creation. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 170, 120898. doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2021.120898
Ning, Y. J. (2021). Speech on “Industrial Blockchain 2.0:2021 New Opportunities for Digital Economy”.
Retrieved from: https://new.qq.com/omn/20210128/20210128A08O3A00.html
North, D. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge University.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511808678
Pal, A., Tiwaria, C. K., & Haldar, N. (2021). Blockchain for business management: Applications,
challenges and potentials. The Journal of High Technology Management Research, 32(2), 100414.
doi:10.1016/j.hitech.2021.100414
People’s Bank of China, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology & China Banking Regulatory
Commission (CBRC). (2013). Notice on Bitcoin Risk Prevention. Retrieved from: http://www.gov.cn/
gzdt/2013-12/05/content_2542751.htm
People’s Bank of China. (2014). Set up a special research group on legal digital currency. Annual Report
of the People’s Bank of China 2014. Retrieved from: http://www.pbc.gov.cn/eportal/fileDir/image_public/
UserFiles/chubanwu/upload/File/中国人民银行年报2014-最终定稿.pdf
People’s Bank of China. (2015). Some key issues in the field of digital currency were investigated.
Annual Report of the People’s Bank of China 2015. Retrieved from: http://www.pbc.gov.cn/chubanwu/114566/115296/3087023/3086996/2016062115305560130.pdf
People’s Bank of China, Office of the Central Cyberspace Affairs Commission, Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology, State Administration for Market Regulation, China Insurance Regulatory
Commission, China’s Securities Regulatory Commission & China’s Bank Regulatory Commission.
(2017). Notice on Preventing the Risk of Token Issuance Financing. Retrieved from: http://www.pbc.
gov.cn/goutongjiaoliu/113456/113469/3374222/index.html
People’s Bank of China. (2020a). Blockchain technology financial application evaluation rules. Retrieved
from: https://www.mpaypass.com.cn/Download/202007/30153205.html
People’s Bank of China. (2020b). Notice to promote the application of blockchain technical specifications. Retrieved from: https://www.jinse.com/news/blockchain/772215.html
People’s Bank of China. (2020c). Technical security specification for financial distributed ledger. Retrieved from: https://www.sohu.com/a/375656914_120057347
People’s Bank of China. (2021). White paper of “The development of Chinese digital RMB”. Retrieved
from: http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2021-07/16/content_5625569.htm
PuHuiMingYan financial research institute. (2018). Application scenario of block chain in supply chain
finance and the first block chain ABS case. Retrieved from: https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/2TbAxw7G_
MD4OmEkfZ2npQ
Qiang, W., & Min, S., & Rong, R.L. (2020). Is China the world’s blockchain leader? Evidence, evolution
and outlook of China’s blockchain research. Journal of Cleaner Production, 264.

184

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

Rong, Z.X. & Yu, L.M. (2020). The application of blockchain technology in the banking industry. China
Finance, 10.
Sanka, A. I., Irfan, M., Huang, I., & Cheung, R. C. C. (2021). A survey of breakthrough in blockchain
technology: Adoptions, applications, challenges and future research. Computer Communications, 169,
179–201. doi:10.1016/j.comcom.2020.12.028
Scott, W. R. (2008). Institutions and organizations: Ideas and interests (3rd ed.). SAGE Publications.
Securities, M. (2017). Driven by the dual track of blockchain policy and practice, the Fintech industry
is heating up. Minsheng Securities Institute.
Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress. (2019). Code Law. Retrieved from: http://www.
npc.gov.cn/npc/c30834/201910/6f7be7dd5ae5459a8de8baf36296bc74.shtml
State Council. (2016). Notice of the State Council on the issuance of the ‘13th Five-Year’ National Informatization Plan. Retrieved from: http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2016-12/27/content_5153411.htm
State Council. (2017). Circular of the State Council on the issuance of the New Generation of Artificial Intelligence Development Plan. Retrieved from: http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2017-07/20/
content_5211996.htm
State Council. (2019a). Opinions on Deepening Reform and Strengthening Food Safety. Retrieved from:
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2019-05/20/content_5393212.htm
State Council. (2019b). Opinions on Supporting Shenzhen in Building a Pilot Demonstration Zone
for Socialism with Chinese Characteristics. Retrieved from: http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2019-08/18/
content_5422183.htm
Sunny, J., Undralla, N., & Madhusudanan Pillai, V. (2020). Supply chain transparency through blockchainbased traceability: An overview with demonstration. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 150, 150.
doi:10.1016/j.cie.2020.106895
Swan, M. (2015). Blockchain: Blueprint for a New Economy. O’Reilly Media, Inc.
TechWeb Report. (2018). Cloud coin network: the basic completion of the clean-up work plan to close
the website on August 31. Retrieved from: TechWeb.com.cn.
The People’s Bank of China. (2011). The Establishment meeting of Bank Card Base Payment Committee
of Clearing Association of China, Network Payment Application Committee and Prepaid Card Committee of Payment. Retrieved from: https://xueshu.baidu.com/usercenter/paper/show?paperid=7d2b16f58e
f921bcfec6f8cdbbb55a60&site=xueshu_se
The People’s Bank of China. (2015). Measures for the administration of online Payment business of nonbank payment institutions. Retrieved from: http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2016-03/18/content_5055171.htm
Thurber, K. J. (2012). Do not invent buggy whips: Create! reinvent! position! disrupt! Digital Systems
Press.

185

﻿
The Role of Blockchain Technology in Harnessing the Sustainability of Chinese Digital Finance

University Big Data and Artificial Intelligence Promotion Alliance. (2021). Top 10 Cases of Blockchain
technology application in China in 2020. Retrieved from: https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/Unt3QI6a7xydZdvxv4q2g
Upadhyay, A., Mukhuty, S., Kumar, V., & Kazancoglu, Y. (2021). Blockchain technology and the circular
economy: Implications for sustainability and social responsibility. Journal of Cleaner Production, 293,
126130. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126130
Varfolomeev, A., Alfarhani, L. H., & Oleiwi, Z. C. (2021). Secure-reliable smart contract applications
based blockchain technology in smart cities environment. Procedia Computer Science, 186, 669–676.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2021.04.188
Wang4185652. (2021). Analyze the impact of the development of block chain on the financial field.
Retrieved from: https://www.doc88.com/p-17216081798929.html
Xi, J. P. (2019). The 18th group study session of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee.
Retrieved from: http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-10/25/content_5444957.htm
Xiao, X. (2018). Five features of the current application of blockchain in the financial field. Internet Finance
Association of China. Retrieved from: http://www.360doc.com/content/18/0623/22/44361760_764758542.
shtml
Yan, N., Sun, B., Zhang, H., & Liu, C. (2016). A partial credit guarantee contract in a capital constrained
supply chain: Financing equilibrium and coordinating strategy. International Journal of Production
Economics, 173, 122–133. doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2015.12.005
Yu, P., Chen, Z., & Sun, J. (2018). Innovative Financing: an Empirical Study on Public– Private Partnership Securitisation in China. Australian Economic Papers. John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.
Yu, P., Gong, R., & Sampat, M. (2022). Blockchain Technology in China’s Digital Economy: Balancing
Regulation and Innovation. In P. Tehrani (Ed.), Regulatory Aspects of Artificial Intelligence on Blockchain (pp. 132–157). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-7998-7927-5.ch007
Zhang, X.R. & Li, M.Y. (2020). The application of blockchain technology in the banking industry.
China Finance, 10.

186

