CSIT (December 2021) 9(4):245–249
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40012-021-00344-5

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Central bank digital currency: risks, challenges and design
considerations for India
Raghava Suresh Samudrala1

•

Srinivasa Kumar Yerchuru1

Received: 16 November 2021 / Accepted: 22 November 2021 / Published online: 3 December 2021
 CSI Publications 2021

Abstract Central bank digital currency (CBDC) is being
experimented by more than 60 central banks across the
globe. Distributed ledger technology (DLT), which is the
foundation for crypto currencies is considered as one of the
options for implementation of CBDC. Real time payments,
continued access to central bank money, financial inclusion
and tracking of illicit activities are considered to be benefited by adopting CBDC. CBDC experiments conducted
so far are inconclusive and no central bank has taken a
decision yet to launch CBDC. This paper looks at the
business and technology risks/challenges associated with
CBDC implementation. This paper also recommends key
design considerations for CBDC exploration in India.
Keywords Central bank digital currency (CBDC) 
Distributed ledger technology (DLT)  Digital currency

1 Central bank digital currency (CBDC) context
and overview
Digital currency as a concept has become popular with
success of bitcoin which was started in 2009. Since then,
several hundred crypto currencies were launched using
blockchain / distributed ledger technology (DLT). These
are private currencies without any underlying assets. In
addition to crypto currencies, tokens/ stable coins have
been launched by private parties, which are backed by

& Srinivasa Kumar Yerchuru
ysksky@icloud.com
1

Present Address: BFSI Industry Advisory Group, Banking,
Financial Services and Insurance Business Unit, Tata
Consultancy Services Ltd., Chennai, India

different kind of assets like equities, bonds, and currencies.
Extending the concept further, tokens/ currencies issued
and backed by a national central bank are referred to as
Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDCs). Even though
there have been many experiments and pilots, no central
bank has taken a decision on launching a digital currency
till date. According to the Bank of England Discussion
Paper on Central Bank Digital Currency [1], any CBDC
would be introduced alongside, rather than replacing cash
and bank deposits. It further clarifies that if it were to
introduce CBDC, it would be denominated in pounds
sterling and would be worth the same as the pound sterling
bank notes. Similar views are expressed by People’s Bank
of China report on e-CNY [2]. According to this, e-CNY
will be a substitute for cash in circulation and will co-exist
with RMB, serving domestic retail payment demands and
will be fully fungible with electronic accounts of authorized operators.
Most common understanding about CBDCs is that they
are implemented using blockchain/DLT. Project Ubin from
Monetary Authority of Singapore [3] and Project Jasper
from Payments Canada [4] were initiated with the aim of
exploring distributed ledger technology for payments and
CBDC. However certain central banks maintained that they
would focus on the business objective and were technology
neutral. Report on Digital Euro by European Central Bank
[5], considers both centralized and decentralized infrastructures as potential backbone for implementation of
CBDC. According to Bank of England discussion paper
[1], ‘‘We do not presume any CBDC must be built using
Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT), and there is no
inherent reason it could not be built using more conventional centralised technology.’’
Broadly CBDCs can be classified into the following 2
categories.

123

246

•

CSIT (December 2021) 9(4):245–249

Wholesale CBDC
–
–

Issued to commercial banks
Serves large value payments

Project Helvetia [6], an experiment between Bank for
International Settlements, Swiss National Bank and SIX,
demonstrates the functional feasibility of settling tokenized
assets with a wholesale CBDC. Similarly, Banque de
France experiments with CBDC [7] also fall under this
category.
•

Retail CBDC
–
–

Issued to retail individuals directly or through
approved financial institutions
Serves low value payments

e-CNY from People’s Bank of China [2] is an example
of retail CBDC.
According to Bank for International Settlements (BIS)
data, more than 60 central banks are currently experimenting with CBDCs. There are also number industry
bodies [11], banks, financial services companies and
technology firms developing thought leadership and point
of views in this area.
Based on the discussion so far, the features of Central
Bank Digital Currencies (CBDCs) can be summarized as
following:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Digital version of national fiat currency
Fully fungible with fiat
Legal tender
Sovereign Liability
Distributed directly or through approved financial
institutions
Typically co-exist and fully fungible with cash

improving cross-border payments would be some of the
drivers for CBDC.
Based on the essence from various central bank reports,
following are the overall objectives for developing CBDCs.
•

•

•
•
•

•

3 Risks/challenges with CBDCs
As mentioned earlier, most common understanding is that
CBDCs are implemented using DLT/blockchain whereas
some central banks are open to technology options. Irrespective of the implementation choice, CBDC poses certain
risks/challenges. They are listed below and explained in
subsequent sections:
1.
2.

3.

2 Business drivers for CBDC
4.
Let us now examine the CBDC business model and its
potential advantages over current form of electronic
money.
Digital Dollar Project [8] highlights the use cases of
digital dollar in domestic peer-to-peer payments as well as
distribution of government benefits to unbanked/underbanked directly. This project also highlights programmable
and customizable aspects of digital dollar to provide data
ownership controls, treasury management efficiencies and
financial accessibility.
Report by seven Central Banks along with BIS titled
‘‘CBDC – Foundational Principles and Core Features’’ [9]
highlights that continued access to central bank money,
increased payments diversity, financial inclusion and

123

Providing Central Bank Money to households and
businesses, as cash usage drops across many countries.
CBDC to act as replacement for cash
CBDCs are being considered for modernization of
payment infrastructure for real time peer-to-peer
payments
Providing access to underbanked/unbanked to enable
financial inclusion
Track tax evasion / track illicit activities which may not
be possible in cash transactions
Simplifying cross border remittances by building
bridges across CBDC infrastructure in different
countries
CBDCs are also seen as the government’s alternative to
citizen’s attraction to crypto currencies and private
stable coins

CBDCs hamper credit growth and financial stability.
DLT and Programmable Money aspects of CBDC may
not be disruptive as commonly perceived in the
industry.
CBDCs do not necessarily help modernize payments
systems.
CBDCs may not always result in better customer
experience. Implications are beyond.

Success of any innovation / technology is directly
dependent on the value it can deliver. Successful implementation of CBDCs need to address these fundamental
challenges and bring out clear articulation of value.
3.1 Credit growth and financial stability
Concept of CBDC is about tokenized form of money issued
by central banks against the deposit of fiat currency and is
typically distributed through banks and financial intermediaries. CBDCs have sovereign liability which means that
banks may act as channels, but customer funds must remain
in central bank account. Unlike traditional savings and

CSIT (December 2021) 9(4):245–249

deposit account balances, these funds are not available to
banks for lending. This can hamper credit growth, should
there be large scale adoption of CBDCs.
During economic crisis like the GFC (Global Financial
Crisis), large number of commercial banks fail, leaving
deposit insurance as the only recourse for retail customers.
During these periods, depositors look for stability and
guarantee rather than returns. Given their sovereign guarantee, we can expect mass migration of money from
commercial banks to CBDC (sovereign liability). Central
banks may disincentivize mass movement of funds to
CBDCs by paying lower or no interest, but it may not solve
the problem as safety outweighs the returns in such scenarios. All banks are ‘Conditionally Solvent’, and such
movement of funds weakens the banking system further,
accelerating their fall and destabilizing the financial system. Central bank’s key responsibility is to ensure the
stability of the banking system and credit growth and
CBDCs appear to be counterproductive for both these
objectives.
Report ‘‘CBDC—Foundational Principles and Core
Features’’ [9], highlights the financial stability risks and
potential disintermediation of banks in case of large-scale
adaptation of CBDC.
3.2 Distributed ledgers and programmable money
Usage of Distributed ledger technology (DLT) and programmable money for implementation of CBDC may not
result in disruptive benefits, as being perceived by many
industry players [3, 4]. Instead, these technologies pose
certain practical challenges as described below.
DLT, as the name suggests, is for maintaining the ledgers distributed across peers (who may not trust each other)
and agreeing to the ledger changes through a consensus
mechanism. In case of CBDC, it is a centralized ledger
owned and maintained by central bank, which is the most
trusted entity in any banking system. Central bank is the
banker for the banks, and transactions validated by it have
the highest credibility and therefore, DLT technology is a
force-fit for CBDCs. Transactions on a centralized ledger
are much simpler and cheaper compared to the same in
DLT, when you take distributed trust out of the equation.
The concept of ‘programmable money’ is about programming the entire transaction value chain in the contract,
which can be executed till completion without any intervention or legal disputes. It is a great concept but has very
limited practical use in the context of financial transactions,
mainly for two reasons.
•

For programmable money to function, all assets must
be under the control of the contract at the beginning.
For example, for a mortgage contract, the borrower

247

•

must submit all installments at the time of signing the
contract so that program can repay lender periodically.
This is not practical. So, the program can only generate
notices to borrowers in case of non-payment of
installment as it happens today.
Programmable money needs trusted third parties (Oracles) to capture real world events on to DLT platform
(Courier delivered the parcel, neither courier nor the
receiver alone can be trusted to capture this information). In the absence of oracles, contracts cannot ensure
automatic dispute-free execution.

Due to these limitations, programmable money turns out
to be simply a set of validations and processing rules like
any other business system.
3.3 Payments modernization
According to the report ‘‘CBDC—Foundational Principles
and Core Features’’ [9], primary motivation for central
banks is CBDC’s use as a means of payment. This report
also mentions ‘‘CBDC is not unique in being able to fulfil
many of these motivations and CBDC designs are likely to
require trade-offs that mean not all motivations can be
realised simultaneously.’’
One argument for CBDCs is that it helps modernize
payments and enables mobile based immediate payments.
As we all know, it does not require CBDC to enable instant
payments. Many countries have implemented instant payments (without CBDC itself) and have achieved significantly high levels of adoption. But frictions remain in
digital payments due to KYC/onboarding costs, transaction
costs, underbanked /unbanked, incompatibility between
multitude of payment rails, small and micro payments etc.
Throwing another payment rails like CBDC at the problem,
instead of addressing the core issues may not help much. It
will be a huge investment to build CBDC infrastructure
from scratch. We should not underestimate the cost and
efforts involved in issuing CBDCs to all households,
businesses as well as acquiring ecosystem of merchants.
3.4 Customer experience
We discussed earlier that large-scale migration to CBDCs
can destabilize the banking system. To address this issue,
central banks may consider lower / zero interest rates or
even limits on CBDC holdings to encourage their usage
only for payments. Moving funds to CBDC only for payments is a big disadvantage from usability / friction perspective. Either users must keep reserves in their CBDC
with potentially lower returns or keep making extra
movement from bank account to CBDC every time they

123

248

CSIT (December 2021) 9(4):245–249

had to make a payment from CBDC. This will significantly
hinder customer experience and results in lower adoption.
The use of distributed ledger technology for CBDCs
requires customers to use private keys to validate their
transactions on the ledger (assuming DLT is used). They
also need to take utmost care to protect the keys. This
means a learning curve for all payers and merchants on the
procedures and measures for CBDCs. Loss of keys will
result in loss of money in the ledger without any easy
recourse. Underbanked/ unbanked population will need
smartphones, digital wallets, digital signatures, and internet
connectivity to store and transact using CBDCs.

•
•
•
•
•

Balance customer privacy and need for tracking AML/
Financial Crime
Provision for financial inclusion (low-cost distribution
and offline facility)
Consider cost of building CBDC in the business case to
evaluate alternatives
Costs associated with onboarding retailers, businesses,
and merchant to be considered
Cross border CBDC needs to be seen more holistically
than a bridge between 2 central banks

5 Conclusion
4 Design considerations for CBDC in India
India has one of the most advanced payment infrastructures
[10] across the globe, with some of the highlights being.
•
•
•
•
•

•

High value and low value payment schemes
24 9 7 Instant Real-time Gross Settlement (RTGS) for
High Value Payments (* [ 3000 USD)
24 9 7 Near Instant Low value payment system
(NEFT)
24 9 7 Immediate payment system for bank-to-bank
transfer of retail payments (IMPS)
Next generation smartphone enabled, Open banking
based, instant payment system with QR code-based
onboarding of merchants (UPI), Growing exponentially
in volumes
Low-cost accounts with payment bank licenses without
lending activities; Funds held in reserves and government securities

Considering modern payment infrastructure that India
already has, it is important to focus on the business case
instead of ‘solution searching for problem’ attitude. We
propose the following key considerations for designing
CBDC in India:
•

•
•
•

•
•

Focus on operating model and business case over
technology. Technology is secondary. No major economy has taken a decision to launch a CBDC yet
[1, 2, 5, 7, 8]
Usage of CBDC is optional. So, assessment of benefits
cannot assume that everyone would use it
Decouple the form of money and payment rails
Interoperability with current modes of payment is
critical. Leverage current investments in payment
modernization instead of green field build
Balance customer experience vs. financial stability
Policy around limits, interest, and transactions costs
around CBDC

123

According to Bank for International Settlements (BIS)
data, more than 60 central banks are experimenting with
CBDCs. Pilots have been inconclusive so far and no central
bank has yet taken a decision to launch CBDCs. India has
one of the most modern payment infrastructures, comparable to the best in the world. It is important to clearly
articulate the vision and business purpose of CBDC and get
the stakeholder buy-in before making major investments in
this area. Distributed ledger technology (DLT) which
appears to be the choice for running pilots for most central
banks, has limitations as described in this paper. India must
choose appropriate technology based on the business vision
and key objectives, instead of ‘solution searching for the
problem’ approach. Risks and challenges in terms of
financial stability, credit growth, payments modernization
and customer experience highlighted in this paper need to
be considered in designing the CBDC and appropriate
solution needs to be arrived at. Interoperability is critical
for successful adaptation and hence form of money needs
to be separated from payment rails in CBDC design.
Greenfield CBDC payment rails can be very expensive to
build and onboard and hence CBDC design must leverage
existing investments in payment modernization. India can
be the thought leader and develop a purpose built CBDC
solution, that can serve as model for other central banks in
this journey.

References
1. Bank of England: Discussion Paper on Central Bank Digital
Currencies. https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/digitalcurrencies
2. People Bank of China: Progress of Research & Development of
E-CNY in China. http://www.pbc.gov.cn/en/3688110/3688172/
4157443/4293696/2021071614584691871.pdf
3. Monetary Authority of Singapore: Project Ubin: Central Bank
Digital Money. https://www.mas.gov.sg/schemes-and-initiatives/
project-ubin

CSIT (December 2021) 9(4):245–249
4. Payments Canada: Project Jasper. https://www.payments.ca/
industry-info/our-research/project-jasper
5. European Central bank: Report on Digital Euro. https://www.ecb.
europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/Report_on_a_digital_
euro*4d7268b458.en.pdf
6. BIS, Swiss National Bank, SNB: Project Helvetia, Wholesale
CBDC experiment. https://www.bis.org/publ/othp35.htm
7. Banque de France report on Central Bank Digital Currency.
https://www.banque-france.fr/en/communique-de-presse/banquede-france-publishes-report-its-experiments-wholesale-centralbank-digital-currency-cbdc

249
8. Digital Dollar Project: Exploring a US CBDC. http://digi
taldollarproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Digital-DollarProject-Whitepaper_vF_7_13_20.pdf
9. Central bank digital currencies: foundational principles and core
features – Report by seven Central banks and Bank for International Settlements (BIS), https://www.bis.org/publ/othp33.htm
10. Payment and Settlement Systems in India. https://www.rbi.org.in/
scripts/PaymentSystems_UM.aspx
11. Raghava Suresh Samudrala, Rodger Oates: Future of Digital
Currencies White Paper. https://www.techuk.org/resource/
techuk-publishes-future-of-digital-currencies-white-paper-1.html

123

