      International Journal of Political Economy




      ISSN: 0891-1916 (Print) 1558-0970 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/mijp20




Central Bank Digital Currency: Financial System
Implications and Control

Ulrich Bindseil

To cite this article: Ulrich Bindseil (2019) Central Bank Digital Currency: Financial System
Implications and Control, International Journal of Political Economy, 48:4, 303-335, DOI:
10.1080/08911916.2019.1693160

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/08911916.2019.1693160




       Published online: 06 Jan 2020.



       Submit your article to this journal



       Article views: 4266



       View related articles



       View Crossmark data



       Citing articles: 1 View citing articles




                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=mijp20
International Journal of Political Economy, 48: 303–335, 2019
# 2019 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 0891-1916 print/1558-0970 online
DOI: 10.1080/08911916.2019.1693160




         Central Bank Digital Currency: Financial System
                    Implications and Control
                                                    Ulrich Bindseil
 Directorate General Market Infrastructures and Payment Systems, European Central Bank


    Abstract: IT progress and its application to the financial industry have inspired central banks and
    academics to reflect about the merits of central bank digital currencies (CBDC) accessible to the
    broad public. This paper first briefly recalls the advantages that have been associated with
    CBDC and reviews some relevant background from the history of the issuance of different forms
    of central bank money. It then discusses two key arguments against CBDC, namely (i) risk of
    structural disintermediation of banks and centralization of the credit allocation process within the
    central bank and (ii) risk of facilitation systemic runs on banks in crisis situations. The paper
    proposes as solution a two-tier remuneration of CBDC, as a tested and simple tool to control the
    quantity of CBDC both in normal and crisis times. It is, however, also acknowledged that con-
    trolling the quantity of CBDC is not necessarily sufficient to control its impact on the financial
    system. Finally, the paper compares the financial account implications of CBDC with the one of
    crypto assets, stable coins, and narrow bank digital money, noting the similarity and differences
    in terms of implications on the financial system. It is concluded that well-controlled CBDC
    seems feasible, without this implying that CBDC would not catalyze change in the finan-
    cial system.

Keywords central bank digital currencies; central banks; financial instability; financial accounts


JEL Classifications E3; E5; G1

                                                   INTRODUCTION

Both academics and central banks have recently started to analyze merits and dangers of
introducing central bank digital currencies (CBDC), i.e., some form of central bank money
handled through electronic means and accessible to the broad public.1 CBDC could therefore
be considered a third form of base money, next to (i) overnight deposits with the central
bank, currently available only to banks, specific non-bank financial firms, and some official
sector depositors; (ii) banknotes, being universally accessible but arguably of limited effi-
ciency and relying on old technology. Some publications distinguish the case of “wholesale”
and “general purpose” CBDC, the former being only accessible to certain firms, while the
latter universally accessible to all households. This article discusses general purpose CBDC,
since wholesale CBDC is of more limited scope and does not really question the established

    Ulrich Bindseil is Director General Market Infrastructure & Payments at the European Central Bank.
304    INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY



structure of the monetary base. General purpose CBDC could be implemented in two alterna-
tive technical formats:

1. CBDC could be offered in the form of deposit accounts with the central bank to all
   households and corporates. From a technological perspective, this would not be very
   innovative, but just a matter of scaling the number of deposit accounts currently offered.
   Although scaling is not innovative per se, it may be technologically challenging. For
   example, in the case of the Eurosystem, the number of accounts could grow from around
   10,000 to some number between 300 and 500 million (all registered major inhabitants of
   the euro area, plus firms fulfilling some legal status and/or some minimum criteria on
   payment or economic activity). The actual servicing and technical maintenance of the
   accounts could be assigned to one or several third-party providers, to ensure efficiency
   and to avoid that the (presumably somewhat less efficient) public sector takes over more
   tasks than needed. The accounts could offer the usual access- and payment functionality
   of sight deposit accounts with banks, including internet- and app-based solutions.
   Commercial banks would provide the service to exchange bank deposits against CBDC
   and banknotes, charging a competitive fee (similarly to ATM fees today).
2. Alternatively, the central bank could offer a digital token currency that would circulate
   in a decentralized way without central ledger. This is often associated with anonymity,
   i.e. meaning that the central bank would not know who currently holds the issued tokens
   (like in the case of banknotes).
   Deposit based CBDC seems simpler and can obviously be made effective against money
laundering and other illicit uses (Berentsen and Sch€ar 2018). It also seems to allow for a
high security and control of the circulating amount of CBDC base money, without this
requiring complex and/or computationally intensive solutions.2 One might argue that if bank-
notes would no longer be generally accepted in retail payments (assume that neither consum-
ers nor retailers would want to continue using banknotes), a token CBDC could be nice to
have as it could allow to preserve anonymous payments (e.g., H€aring 2018, strongly advo-
cates the anonymity of payments). However, others will find the arguments for anonymous
payments with token money more difficult to understand, or will argue that a more propor-
tionate solution would consist in a sufficient protection of electronic payments data.
   A number of quite diverse benefits of CBDC have been put forward in the literature, as
summarized in Table 1 (see also e.g., Engert and Fung 2017; Mancini-Griffoli et al. 2018)).
The table also explains (in the last column) under what possible further conditions the
respective advantage would actually materialize, or be particularly strong. Most of the pro-
posed advantages are subject to controversial debate in the literature.
   Consider these possible arguments in favor of CBDC in more detail below.

Efficient Retail Payments

CBDC offers a number of advantages with regards to the convenience, efficiency, stability
and accessibility of retail payment. While electronic payments with all their efficiency gains
                                                                                           WINTER 2019         305


                                                TABLE 1
     Overview of benefits that some have associated with CBDC, and related factors or requirements

Benefit of CBDC                                                     Possible further factors or requirements
A. Efficient retail payments
  A.1 Making available efficient, secure and modern        In particular in economies without high-quality
       central bank money to everyone                         electronic commercial bank money, and/or without a
                                                              secure and efficient payment system
  A.2 Strengthening the resilience, availability and       In particular in economies in which banknote demand
        contestability of retail payments                     vanishes and private electronic payments solutions
                                                              lack competition
B. Overcome use of banknotes for illicit payment and store of value
  B. Better control of illicit payment and saving          Requires (i) discontinuation of banknotes (or at least of
      activities, money laundering, and                       larger denominations); (ii) CBDC to not take the
      terrorist financing                                     form of anonymous token money
C. Strengthen monetary policy
  C.1 Allows overcoming the ZLB as negative interest       Requires discontinuation of banknotes (or at least of
        rates can be applied to CBDC                          larger denominations)
  C.2 Interest rates on CBDC provide for additional
        monetary policy instruments, independently
        of ZLB
  C.3 Easier ability to provide helicopter money           Requires that each citizen has a CBDC account
D. Sovereign money related
  D.1 Improve financial stability and reduce moral         CBDC takes over to large or full extent sight deposit
        hazard of banks by downscaling the role of the        issuance by banks
        banking system in money creation
  D.2 Larger seignorage income to state (and citizens)     CBDC takes over to large or full extent sight deposit
   as state takes back money creation from banks.             issuance by banks




have been possible for some decades on the basis of commercial bank money, offering elec-
tronic payments directly in central bank money could have additional advantages. A compre-
hensive analysis of these justifications of CBDC can be found for example in Sveriges
Riksbank’s (2018) second report on the e-krona project.
   In short, collapsing demand for cash in the absence of CBDC would imply that citizens
would no longer have access to the central bank balance sheet. In that state of the world, trust
in the currency would entirely depend on trust in financial intermediaries issuing and manag-
ing commercial money. The Riksbank concludes on the basis of its report that the “proposed
focus of this programme should be on developing an e-krona that constitutes a prepaid value
(electronic money) without interest and with traceable transactions”. Barontini and Holden
(2019: 3–4) also report about a recently conducted pilot by the Central Bank of Uruguay,
which would qualify as the most advanced and concrete CBDC experiment up to now, and
which was part of a financial inclusion program.
   A number of arguments can thus be distinguished that strengthen the case of CBDC to
support efficient retail payments: (i) vanishing demand for banknotes; (ii) unsatisfactory
access of relevant shares of households to commercial banking system, which can occur both
in least-developed countries (with a generally underdeveloped banking system) and countries
306     INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY



with a relatively high income disparity, such as the US (Rogoff 2016); (iii) an unstable or
overly concentrated retail payment infrastructure. The CBDC survey amongst central banks
of Barontini and Holden (2019: 8) reports that for central banks, the four most popular rea-
sons to consider CBDC are, in this order of importance, (1) payment safety; (2) payment effi-
ciency; (3) financial stability and (4) financial inclusion. Only financial stability seems to fall
out of the category A of arguments in favor of CBDC.


Prevent Illicit Payment and Store of Value with Central Bank Money

This argument, which assumes a discontinuation or at least strong reduction in the role of
banknotes, is developed in most detail by e.g., Rogoff (2016). Obviously, this motivation of
CBDC would not apply if CBDC circulate as anonymous token money even for high
amounts. Some, like H€aring (2018), who are strongly pre-occupied with the privacy of pay-
ments and fear that internet retailers and state authorities use payments data to curb eventu-
ally the freedom of citizens, will not agree with this specific argument for CBDC.


Allows Overcoming the ZLB as One May Impose Negative Interest Rates on CBDC

For example, Dyson and Hodgson (2016) argue that “if digital cash is used to completely
replace physical cash, this could allow interest rates to be pushed below the zero-lower
bound.” Rogoff (2016) develops this argument in detail. By allowing to overcome the zero-
lower bound (“ZLB”) and therefore freeing negative interest rate policies (“NIRP”) of its cur-
rent constraints, a world with only digital central bank money would allow for – according to
this view – strong monetary stimulus in a sharp recession and/or financial crisis. This could
not only avoid recession, unemployment, and/or deflation but also the need to take recourse
to nonstandard monetary policy measures which have more negative side effects than NIRP.
Opponents of NIRP will obviously dislike this argument in favor of CBDC, and will thus see
CBDC potentially as an instrument to overcome previous limitations of “financial repression”
and “expropriation” of the saver.


Interest on CBDC Provides an Additional Monetary Policy Instrument

Dyson and Hodgson (2016) consider that CBDC “widens the range of options for monetary
policy: Implementing digital cash can allow new monetary policy tools to be used”.
According to this view, varying interest rates of CBDC would provide for a new, non-
redundant monetary policy instrument that would allow improving the overall effectiveness
of monetary policy. This idea is developed further by Barrdear and Kumhof (2016: 3) who
find that “a CBDC regime can contribute to the stabilization of the business cycle, by giving
policymakers access to a second policy instrument that controls either the quantity or the
price of CBDC in a countercyclical fashion. This second policy instrument becomes espe-
cially effective in response to shocks to private money demand and private money creation.”
Meaning et al. (2018) also analyze how CBDC could enrich the monetary policy toolkit and
                                                                            WINTER 2019      307


how it would impact the transmission mechanism, and come to the conclusion that it would
all depend on the details of the design of CBDC. Finally, Berentsen and Sch€ar (2018: 102)
argue that interest on CBDC would simplify monetary policy as the “central bank would sim-
ply use the interest rate paid on these accounts as its main policy tool”. Mancini-Griffoli
et al. (2018: 25) take the view that CBDC is unlikely to affect the main channels of monetary
policy transmission, which is also the assumption taken here.


Easier Ability to Provide Helicopter Money

Again, Dyson and Hodgson (2016) argue that “digital cash can be used as a tool to increase
aggregate demand by making ‘helicopter drops’ of newly created digital cash to all citizens,
making it easier to meet the Bank of England’s monetary policy target of price stability.”
Obviously, the relevance of this argument will only be shared by supporters of helicopter
money. Moreover, it could be argued that it is a relatively weak argument as it only facili-
tates the distribution of helicopter money (but is no pre-condition).


Improve Financial Stability and Reduce Moral Hazard by Downscaling Banks

The arguments D1 and D2 in favor of CBDC relate to the vision that CBDC is a tool to
make feasible the “sovereign money”3 idea, i.e., a monetary system in which banks would no
longer “create” sight deposits and thus means of payment (Benes and Kumhof 2012; H€aring
2018: 214–223, Mayer and Huber 2014). For example, Dyson and Hodgson (2016) consider
that CBDC “can make the financial system safer: Allowing individuals, private sector com-
panies, and non-bank financial institutions to settle directly in central bank money (rather
than bank deposits) significantly reduces the concentration of liquidity and credit risk in pay-
ment systems. This, in turn, reduces the systemic importance of large banks and thereby
reduces the negative externalities that the financial instability of banks has on society. In add-
ition, by providing a genuinely risk-free alternative to bank deposits, a shift from bank depos-
its to digital cash reduces the need for government guarantees on deposits, eliminating a
source of moral hazard from the financial system.” Huber (1999: 5–6), one of the key
German supporters of “sovereign money” develops this perspective in detail.


Seignorage Income Redirected to State (and Citizens)

For example, Dyson and Hodgson argue that CBDC “can recapture a portion of seigniorage
and address the decline of physical cash … ” Also e.g., Mayer and Huber (2014) give much
prominence to the assumed fiscal advantages of sovereign money. They estimate that e.g., in
the euro area annual additional state revenues would be in the order of magnitude of more
than EUR 100 billion (assuming a pre-2008 interest rate level). Obviously, with the current
low levels of interest rates, and the outlook on future interest rates as it is priced in yield
curves, this argument has become rather irrelevant for the time being.
308     INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY



    Overall, one may conclude from reviewing the arguments in favor of CBDC that the mer-
its of CBDC of type A, i.e., contribute to an efficient, resilient, accessible and contestable
payment system seem relatively uncontroversial, without this per se being sufficient to justify
CBDC. Argument B is more controversial, but this controversy seems to be outside the area
of payment system efficiency, monetary and financial stability. Argument C1 will be shared
by monetary economists who support NIRP, but will be disliked by those who consider
NIRP a form of financial repression. Arguments C2 and C3 are likely to be rejected by the
majority of professional monetary economists. Finally, the sovereign money arguments (D)
are also overall controversial, and again the majority of monetary economists are likely to
reject them. Moreover, as will be discussed in sections “The Structural Bank
Disintermediation Issue” and “Bank runs into CBDC”, the disintermediation of the banking
system has been considered as one of the major drawbacks and risks of CBDC.
    Therefore, to isolate the more obvious, humble case for CBDC which is likely to be
shared by most economists, namely that it could serve as an efficient retail means of payment
(Argument A) from the perceived danger that CBDC leads unintendedly to a sovereign
money financial system (as it would boost so much the relative attractiveness of central bank
money relative to bank deposits) it seems essential to be able to steer the issuance of CBDC
in such a way that it serves the efficiency of retail payments, without necessarily putting into
question the monetary order by making CBDC a major form of store of value.4 It will be
argued in this article that such a steering is feasible, and with less fundamental change than
inherent e.g., in the proposal of Kumhof and Noone (2018). The well-tested tool of tiered
remuneration seems to be a way to ensure that the volume of CBDC will be well controlled.
A system of financial accounts calibrated towards the euro area will illustrate the mechanics
and implications of CBDC and will allow presenting flow of funds implications.
    The rest of this article proceeds as follows. Section “Lessons from the history of central
bank monetary liabilities” recalls some relevant history of the issuance of different forms of
central bank money. Section “The Structural Bank Disintermediation Issue” discusses what
some consider as the major problem with CBDC, namely that CBDC would disintermediate
in a structural way the banking system (being what sovereign money advocates would con-
sider a major improvement for the financial system and society). Section “The Structural
Bank Disintermediation Issue” also introduces the financial accounts framework that illus-
trates the impact of CBDC on the financial structure, which will be used in different variants
throughout the paper.5 Section “Bank runs into CBDC” discusses the second danger associ-
ated with CBDC, namely that it would facilitate runs out of bank deposits into central bank
money in financial crisis situations (i.e., not structural, but say “cyclical” disintermediation).
Section “A two-tier remuneration system for CBDC” proposes a simple approach to the con-
trol of the quantity of CBDC through a tiered remuneration system. This would allow con-
trolling the quantity of CBDC at a level such that the central bank balance sheet size could
be kept broadly stable and significantly reduce the political constraints on controlling the
quantity of CBDC through low or negative interest rates. Section “Bank disintermediation
with low-volume CBDC?” analyzes to what extent controlling the quantity of CBDC would
really imply at the same time neutrality of CBDC for the financial system. Section “Flow-of
funds comparison of CBDC with private digital currencies” compares CBDC to private
                                                                            WINTER 2019     309


digital money initiatives in terms of the impact on the financial system. Section
“Conclusions” concludes.


 LESSONS FROM THE HISTORY OF CENTRAL BANK MONETARY LIABILITIES

Central banks have traditionally issued two main forms of liabilities: Deposits and banknotes.
In addition, mixed forms such as certificates of deposits have been widely used in some pla-
ces, such as in particular in Naples, where the fede di credito served a means to pay with
deposits, without having to be present in the public bank. As reviewed e.g., in Roberds and
Velde (2014), Ugolini (2017), or Bindseil (2019), the first public banks issuing means of
payment, i.e., the earliest central banks, did so in the form of deposits, and not in the form of
banknotes. Before the Stockholm Banco invented modern banknotes in 1661, there had been
at least six large and successful early public central banks that successfully issued giro
deposits, namely: the Taula de Canvi founded of Barcelona in 1401, the Casa San Giorgio of
Genoa of 1407, the Banco di Rialto of Venice of 1587, the Bank of Amsterdam of 1609, the
Hamburger Bank of 1619 and the Banco del Giro of Venice in 1619. Moreover, the Naples
public banking system created in the 1580s also worked as a system of quasi-central banks
with mutual recognition of their liabilities. These public banks granted the possibility to open
deposit accounts in principle to anyone, partially subject to a minimum initial deposit. In this
sense, they granted universal access to central bank liabilities (such as banknotes do, and
such as CBDC would). However, in the absence of electronic remote access, reach was lim-
ited to those who could come to the bank to undertake their transactions physically there,
and who had some wealth to deposit and to use for payments (whereby the fede di credito
solved this problem to some extent – see below). For example, the Taula de Canvi of
Barcelona would have had 1460 depositors in the year 1433 (Roberds and Velde 2014: 29).
The Bank of Amsterdam had more than 2000 depositors between 1650 and 1790, with a
peak close to 3000 in the first decades of the eighteenth century (Van Dillen 1934). Actually,
there was no discrimination at that time between “households”, “corporates” and
“commercial banks” with regards to access to central bank accounts. Most depositors were
domestic and international merchants and other wealthy businessmen and families, including
some who specialized in financial intermediation services. Early central banks also already
acted systematically as the bank of the government, i.e., receiving the deposits of the govern-
ment, and providing the accounts of the government being used for receiving tax and other
payments and for making large payments e.g., to suppliers.
   Banknotes were a more universally accessible form of central bank liabilities as they were
by definition transferable and “to the bearer”, i.e., everyone could receive them as means of
payment, and could further use them to make payments to others. Banknotes were first issued
by the Riksens St€anders Bank in 1661–1664, and then again by the Bank of England
(founded in 1694) and the Bank of Scotland (founded in 1695). The Bank of Scotland would
have been the first central bank issuing low-denomination banknotes almost from the begin-
ning, i.e., which were also suitable for retail payments and thereby effectively granting uni-
versal access to central bank money. According to Saville (1996: 26), the Bank of Scotland
310     INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY



issued 5- and 10 Pounds Scot notes as of 1700, and in 1704 started to issue 1 Pound Scots
notes (with 12 Pound Scot being equal to 1 Pound Sterling). The Bank of England began
issuing notes with fixed denominations only in 1725, the first such denomination having
been £20. In 1759, notes for £10 and £15 were issued. The war with Napoleon led to the
issue of banknotes for £5 in 1793 (Bank of England 1969: 212), corresponding to around
523 g silver, i.e., still a very large value at that time.
   An intermediate form of central bank liabilities were the so-called fede di credito that
were invented in the late sixteenth century by the Naples public banking system
(Costabile and Nappi 2018). These were essentially certificates of deposits that could be
used to settle financial claims in central bank deposit money without physical presence
at the central bank. Payment via fede di credito may be considered an early form of
today’s electronic payments via bank deposits – they relied on bank deposits and the
associated booking in a central ledger, but payments could be done remotely. Of course,
settlement modalities were different, as the transaction was only settled in the books of
the public banks once a fede returned to the bank, which could take a long time. In the
meantime, the relevant amount remained blocked on the account of the depositor who
had paid with the fede di credito.
   Whether banknotes and deposits are of a fundamentally similar or different nature has
been a heated issue of debate during the eighteenth and even more during the nineteenth cen-
tury, whereby banknotes tended to be associated for a long time with higher risks in terms of
tempting (central) banks to over-issue until they become illiquid and default. This view was
inspired by examples such as the Stockholm Banco which had to be saved in 1664 and the
Banque Royale of John Law, which failed in 1720. Reflecting this differentiation, for
example Peel’s Act of 1844 constrained the ability of the Bank of England to issue bank-
notes, but not to issue deposits. The literature comes back to the topic again and again, like
B€usch (1801: 4–6) and Dunbar (1906). Dunbar (1906: 243) is surprised that the act establish-
ing the Reichsbank in 1875 makes such a difference in terms of imposing liquid reserves on
banknotes, but not on deposit issuance:
   These restrictions seem to illustrate the exaggerated importance which is still ascribed to the
   issue of notes on the continent of Europe. Notes are still regarded as the one important factor in
   the phenomena which result from the operations of banks, and the essential similarity in most
   respects of notes and deposits is overlooked

   That notes were deemed more vulnerable to cause runs, especially as long as multiple note-
issuing banks were competing, as it was the case in parts of the nineteenth century, may have
been justified to some extent. The universal access to them (as also people physically remote to
the issuing institution could hold banknotes) gave possibly more scope for an unstable demand.
Still in 1924, the Dawes plan requested that the new Reichsbank statutes would foresee a pre-
cious metal reserve ratio for banknotes of one third, without constraining deposit issuance.
Eventually, the concept of the monetary base, which sees banknotes and central bank deposits as
fundamentally equivalent forms of money, conquered monetary economics as of the 1930s.
Moreover, the switch to a paper standard after the end of the Bretton Woods system made the
problem of over-issuance of central bank money less relevant, at least from the angle of
                                                                                  WINTER 2019             311


                                                TABLE 2
    Forms of central bank money in six early central bank balance sheets, averages for periods within
               1770–1811 (source: Bindseil 2019, which also contains the data sources)

                                                                  Riksens
                       Bank of         Hamburger      Bank        St€
                                                                    anders       Caisse        Bank of the
                      Amsterdam          Bank      of England       Bank       d’Escompte     United States
Time period                                 1770–1800                          1777–1792         1792–1811
Giro deposits            1.00            1.00         0.12          0.06          0.09              0.26
  issued/total BS
Banknotes issued/        0.00            0.00         0.33          0.47          0.41             0.18
  total BS
Banknotes/deposits       0.00            0.00         2.75           7.8           4.6              0.7



                                             TABLE 3
                                    €nder/Bundesbank: share of different types of depositors
         Reichsbank/Bank Deutscher La
                      (Source: Reichsbank 1925; Deutsche Bundesbank 1976)

                           Banks (%)                Non-bank private (%)                 Public (%)
        1914                    39                           16                             45
        1925                    16                           19                             65
        1938                    53                           40                              7
        1948                    50                            7                             43
        1960                    81                            1                             18
        1970                    79                            1                             20



convertibility. The table below provides an overview of which types of central bank liabilities
(deposits or banknotes) were issued by some selected pre-1800 central banks, and of their rela-
tive relevance in the last decades of the eighteenth century (see Bindseil 2019; Table 2).
    It is noteworthy that deposits have not only been the original form of central bank money
(sometimes including remote-access techniques, like the fede di credito of Naples), but that
for a long time, the feeling has occasionally been expressed that banknotes might not be the
ultimate form of central bank money either, but only a temporary one, that will be replaced
again by deposits, being eventually superior. For example, in the words of Ulens (1908: 5):
   No-one is questioning today the advantages of fiduciary money; the advantages of replacing
   metallic money with it are universally accepted. That fiduciary money takes the form of
   banknotes … is far from being the last word of progress. Much more perfect will be the
   mechanism of exchange based on current account deposits. … But we are not yet there. … The
   love of gold for its own sake has been replaced by the love of the banknote for its own sake.

   The broad access to central bank deposits continued generally until the mid of the twenti-
eth century. The following table provides evidence of the share of bank, non-bank private,
and public overnight deposits with German twentieth century central banks. Bank deposits
became clearly dominant only after WWII, while before, non-bank private deposits played a
significant role. Non-bank private deposits were marginal as of the 1960s (Table 3).
312     INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY



   It would deserve a study on its own to review the decisions and justifications that led
central banks to restrict more and more in the course of the twentieth century the access of
non-banks to central bank accounts (such as in the case of the German central banks). De
Kock (1939: 10) notes that
   As regards their business relations with customers other than Governments and banks, the range
   varied from the Bank of England, which by the end of the nineteenth century had already come
   to give up most of its commercial banking business and to deal mainly with operators in the
   money market, to the Banque de France, which had a large number of branches and conducted
   a large business with regular clients, including many small tradesmen all over the country.

    Moreover, De Kock (1939: 327–332) identifies it as one amongst four big trends in cen-
tral banking at that time to restrict direct dealings with the public. He quotes various central
bank laws of the 1930s, which restricted central banking business accordingly, although
mostly he refers to lending operations of the central banks.
    From this review of practices over the last centuries, two key points can be retained for
CBDC: First, deposits with unconstrained access for all types of depositors were the original
form of central bank monetary liabilities, and neither banknotes, nor deposits restricted to
commercial banks. Even some sort of remote use of deposits was practiced at a large scale
starting in the 1580s in Naples in the form of the fede di credito. Since access to deposits
was not constrained during the first centuries of central banking, any household or firm could
open an account provided it deposited a possible minimum deposit amount. The current
restriction of central bank deposits to banks (besides public deposits) was only implemented
around 70 years ago. In this sense, it could be argued that moving to CBDC would be return-
ing to the roots of central banking. Second, for a long time, i.e., from the Riksbank’s first
unsustainable issuance of banknotes in 1661–1664, to at least the Dawes Plan of 1924, bank-
notes were considered the more dangerous form of central bank liabilities, compared with
deposits. It is useful to remind these centuries-long controversial (and inconclusive) discus-
sions about the relative dangers of different forms of central bank liabilities in the context of
CBDC, which are also controversially discussed from the same angle. History in any case
suggests caution and to avoid preempting the conclusion that CBDC would constitute a par-
ticularly dangerous central bank liability. At least, such a conclusion should not be reached
before considering tools to control CBDC.


               THE STRUCTURAL BANK DISINTERMEDIATION ISSUE

CBDC has both found support, and caused strong concerns, with regards to its impact on the
structure and scale of bank intermediation. Advocates of “sovereign money” see bank dis-
intermediation as precisely the goal of CBDC. Already Huber (1999: 18), an advocate of
“sovereign money”, had correctly identified the financial account implications of central
bank money replacing bank-issued sight deposits.
   Others have strongly rejected the idea of CBDC inflating the central bank balance sheet at
the expense of deposit funding of banks. For example, Pollock (2018), in a testimony to the
                                                                                WINTER 2019       313


Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and Trade of the Committee on Financial Services United
States House of Representatives, argues that CBDC would lead to various distortions pre-
cisely because of bank disintermediation. Accordingly, on one side the central bank would
benefit from an unfair competitive advantage in deposit collection and amass undue power
and market share (also likely misusing its regulatory powers to strengthen further its unfair
advantages). On the other hand, it would have competitive disadvantages in credit provision,
which it would however ignore, leading to inefficiency, conflicts of interest and financial
losses that eventually the taxpayer would have to bear.
   CPMI-MC (2018: 2) also express somewhat similar concerns that structurally, CBDC
could have negative effects on credit allocation and thereby economic efficiency:
  Introducing a CBDC could result in a wider presence of central banks in financial systems.
  This, in turn, could mean a greater role for central banks in allocating economic resources,
  which could entail overall economic losses should such entities be less efficient than the private
  sector in allocating resources. It could move central banks into uncharted territory and could
  also lead to greater political interference.

   Carstens (2019) reiterates such worries (see also Mancini-Griffoli et al 2018: 21–24).
Finally, CPMI-MC (2018: 2) emphasizes the cross-border issues that CBDC may create.
Indeed, also for banknotes, foreign demand has been a major factor in recent decades (e.g.,
Jobst and Stix 2017). CBDC, if offered in the same perfectly elastic way as banknotes, could
facilitate further the cross-border access to central bank money:
  For currencies that are widely used in cross-border transactions, all the considerations outlined
  above would apply with added force, especially during times of generalized flight to safety. The
  introduction of a CBDC in one jurisdiction could adversely affect others. Central banks that
  have introduced or are seeking to introduce a CBDC should consider cross-border issues
  where relevant.

    The creation of CBDC is captured in a financial account system shown below in Figure 1,
which very broadly replicates the euro area financial accounts as of Q2 2018 (as provided in
the ECB Statistics Warehouse or the ECB Economic Bulletin). The accounts are simplified
in particular with regards to netting and that the non-bank financial sectors (OFIs and ICPFs,
i.e., “other financial institutions” and “insurance companies and pension funds”) have been
left aside, or been broadly integrated into the household sector. Also, the ECB’s asset pur-
chase program is not reflected.
    If households substitute banknotes with CBDC, then central bank and commercial bank
balance sheets do not really change. However, if households substitute commercial bank
deposits with CBDC, then this would imply a funding loss for commercial banks and could
lead to “disintermediation” of the banking sector. In particular, sight deposits with low remu-
neration could be expected to shift at least to some extent into riskless CBDC, leading to a
loss of commercial banks’ funding of equal size. Banks would have to try to offer better con-
ditions on their deposits in order to protect their deposit base as much as possible – but this
would imply higher funding costs for banks and a loss of commercial bank “seignorage”.
Below, the creation of CBDC has thus been split into two parts: CBDC1 which substitute
314     INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY



                        Households, pension and investment funds, insurance companies
 Real Assets                  20                      Household Equity                   40
 Sight deposits                5          -CBDC2
 Savings + me deposits         4                     Bank loans                          5
 CBDC                              +CBDC1 +CBDC2
 Banknotes                      1 -CBDC1
 Bank bonds                     4        +S1
 Corporate/Government bonds 7            -S1
 Equity                        8
                                                  Corporates
 Real assets                   13                     Bonds issued                      3
 Sight deposits                 2                     Loans                             8
 Savings deposits              1                      Shares / equity                  5
                                                 Government
 Real assets                   11                     Bonds issued                      9
                                                      Loans                             2
                                              Commercial Banks
 Loans to corporates              8                   Sight deposits          7 -CBDC2
 Loans to government              2                   Savings + me deposits 5
 Loans to HH                     5                    Bonds issued            4       +S1
 Corp/state bonds                 5 -S2               Equity                 3
 Central bank deposits            0                   Central bank credit    1 +CBDC2 -S1-S2
                                                 Central Bank
 Credit to banks            1 +CBDC2 -S1-S2           Banknotes issued        1 -CBDC1
 Corp/Government bonds       0         +S1+S2         Deposits of banks        0
                                                      CBDC                       +CBDC1 +CBDC2
 Figure 1. Financial accounts representation of CBDC, compensating securities purchases by the central bank, and
          possible bank deleveraging (numbers in trillion of euro broadly illustrating euro area accounts).


banknotes and CBDC2 which substitute deposits with banks. It seems most likely that indeed
CBDC would do both of those, but it is unclear with what weights. The effect of CBDC1 on
the rest of the financial accounts is neutral, but the effects of CBDC2 are not: CBDC2
lengthens the central bank balance sheet, as central bank credit will have to fill the funding
gaps of the banks. The central bank may want to avoid this effect by purchasing government
and corporate bonds, whereby the source of the bonds could be either households or banks,
being captured in the financial accounts by S1 and S2, respectively. In the former case, it has
been assumed here that the households will not keep the money obtained in the form of bank
deposits, but would purchase bank bonds that the banks would in addition issue. However,
from a financial account perspective, it makes no difference if the purchases of bonds by the
central bank from households imply additional deposits with banks or additional capital mar-
ket investments of households into bank bonds.
   While CBDC1 appears uncontroversial as it merely substitutes one form of central bank
money into another without changing the rest of the financial system, CBDC2 increases the
dependence of banks on central bank credit and decreases sight deposits with the banking
system. Both S1 and S2 have positive effects in the sense that they reduce again the depend-
ence of banks on central bank credit. CBDC2 will obviously have effects on funding costs of
the banking system. This is because, typically, central bank credit and bond issuance are
more expensive than the remuneration rate of sight deposits (except in unusual
                                                                            WINTER 2019      315


circumstances, as the ones prevailing e.g., in the euro area since 2014, in which obtaining
credit from the central bank was partially possible for banks at negative rates, while sight
deposits of households with banks remained non-negative). Moreover, a larger recourse to
central bank credit could lead to collateral scarcity issues and the question whether the cen-
tral bank collateral framework becomes so crucial from a credit allocation perspective that
one would observe an effective centralization of the credit provision process. Both effects
will be analyzed further in the next two subsections.


Effects on Bank Funding Costs of CBDC2

Following Juks (2018: section 4.2–4.3), one needs to understand what impact CBDC will
have on average funding costs of banks, and therefore on bank lending rates (see also e.g.,
Engert and Fung 2017). In addition, it should be understood how this might affect monetary
policy interest rate setting of the central bank and the seignorage income of the central bank.
Bank funding costs will obviously increase because a cheap funding source (sight deposits)
decreases, and more expensive funding sources (central bank credit or bank bond issuance)
have to take over. The central bank would have to compensate the implied tightening of
financial conditions caused by a decrease of cheap sight deposit financing of banks by lower-
ing the monetary policy rate. The extent of the required lowering of short-term interest rates
would depend on the size of CBDC2, on the relative share of bank funding in the economy,
and on the spread between the other bank funding rates with the monetary policy operations
rate. Moreover, substitution effects from bank-based to capital market-based financing of the
economy would impact on the overall needed adjustment of central bank rates. The fact that
bank funding is only one part of overall funding of the economy implies that the central
bank will not reduce the short-term interest rates in a way that bank funding costs are stabi-
lized, but only partially so. Therefore, in the new equilibrium, banks will have lost competi-
tiveness and will lose some market share relative to other forms of funding (though capital
markets and non-bank intermediaries).
    Tables 4 and 5 provide the average levels of the relevant shares and interest rates for the
period 2003–2008, and 2009–2018, respectively (Data sources: bond yields Merrill Lynch;
all other data: ECB).
    The largest share in bank funding came from deposits with residual maturity of less than
2 years and redeemable at 3- or less month notice, i.e., the types of deposits contained in the
monetary aggregate M3. This is also the cheapest funding source in the first period, while in
the second period, central bank funding becomes even cheaper. Actually, overnight deposits
contribute 50–65% of these deposits, and have a significantly lower interest rate. For
example, in December 2005, new overnight deposits were remunerated on average at 0.71%
while up to 1-year term deposits at 2.15%.
    What happens to overall central bank income because of CBDC2? Two effects partially
compensate each other: the increase of the monetary base, against the needed lowering of inter-
est rates. The net effect will, in any case, be an increase of central bank income and an increase
of overall bank funding costs. For example, assume that the 2003–2008 data applies and that
316     INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY


                                               TABLE 4
                 Euro area bank funding costs across different instruments, 2003–2008

                                            Share in bank funding (%)   Average interest rate (%)
           Deposits (in M3)                            44                         1.83
           Other deposits                              13                         3.25
           Bonds issued                                30                         4.10
           Equity issued                               10                         8.47
           Central bank credit (MRO rate)              3                          2.79



                                              TABLE 5
                Euro area bank funding costs across different instruments, 2009–2018.

                                            Share in bank funding (%)   Average interest rate (%)
           Deposits (in M3)                            47                        0.78
           Other deposits                              14                        2.39
           Bonds issued                                23                        2.15
           Equity issued                               12                        10.54
           Central bank credit (MRO rate)              4                         0.50




10% points of M3-deposits of banks are substitute with CBDC2, and also that CBDC is not
remunerated. If everything else remains unchanged, then the funding costs of banks increase
by 0.1(2.79–1.83%), i.e., around 10 basis points. If the central bank wants to keep financial
conditions unchanged, it needs now to lower the general interest rate level. If bank funding is
50% of total funding of the economy, the rest being capital market based, then the central bank
will have to lower the interest rate level by 5 basis points if it wants to achieve that the average
funding costs of the real economy stay unchanged (and if one ignores secondary effects). The
central bank’s income will have evolved as follows: 13%2.74%  3%2.79% ¼ 0.13% of the
balance sheet length of banks. Depositors will have given up 10%1.83% of income, i.e.,
0.18% of the balance sheet length of banks (which they do voluntarily because they were
assumed to choose this shift out of preference for CBDC). Average funding costs of banks will
have increased by 5 basis points, and costs of capital market financing will have decreased by
the same amount, implying some loss of competitiveness of banking.


Increase of Banks’ Reliance on Central Bank Credit, Collateral Constraints, and
Credit Centralization?

To what extent could CBDC undermine the decentralized, market-based financing of the real
economy by increasing massively the central bank balance sheet, and thereby making it,
either via increased central bank securities holdings, or via an increased funding of banks
through central bank credit, an important (but potentially inefficient) element of the credit
allocation process?
                                                                            WINTER 2019      317


   State liabilities can be stores of value for households, in particular if they are matched, in
the state balance sheet, by real assets that the state owns. However, probably the state would
not want to become a financial intermediary for household savings, which would happen if
the state re-invested proceeds from issuing debt to households in the form of financial assets,
or in the form of real assets not linked to state tasks, just for the sake or re-investment. This
logic may also be applied to central banks in a somewhat different way as central banking
starts from the liability side: to the extent they issue means of payment, they need to re-invest
the proceeds from doing so. However, the central bank probably does not want central bank
money to become a large-scale store of value, i.e., investment vehicle, as this would mean
that the central bank would become a financial intermediary. Turning to the asset side of the
central bank balance sheet, one may note different views of central banks on what is the best
match with its monetary liabilities: The Fed and the Bank of England systematically invested
the proceeds from the issuance of banknotes into government paper. The Deutsche
Bundesbank in contrast traditionally considered exposures of the central bank to the govern-
ment as problematic and therefore preferred assets in the form of loans to banks collateral-
ized with high quality securities or bills of exchange.
   In view of the outstanding levels of government debt in developed economies (end 2018
levels for e.g., the euro area and UK around 85%; US around 105%; Japan around 235%),
and the much lower level of banknotes in circulation so far (around 10% of GDP for
advanced economies, and 8% for emerging economies, see e.g., Riksbank 2018: 6), it would
appear that there would be some scope for CBDC2 to be matched on the central bank asset
side with higher holdings of government bonds, such that neither (i) the reliance of banks on
central bank credit would need to increase, nor (ii) would the central bank have to hold a
credit risk intense portfolio of securities. In any case, currently at least, the central banks of
the UK, Japan and the Euro area hold large QE related portfolios that created large amounts
of excess reserves of banks, that would provide scope for CBDC2 of at least the size of
banknotes in circulation before reserve scarcity would emerge (without any further purchases
of government bonds). Moreover, once the potential for matching CBDC with government
exposures would have been exhausted, the central bank can still try to minimize the impact
of the lengthening of the central bank balance sheet on the credit allocation process by aim-
ing at diversified exposures to the private sector (e.g., outright holdings of various securities
types and issuers proportional to market capitalization; credit operations with banks against a
broad collateral set).
   In so far, it could be argued that there is some scope for CBDC2 before the central banks
would have to accept really credit-intense exposures to the private sector, and thereby play a
potentially larger role in the credit allocation of the economy, which may eventually be nega-
tive for the overall efficiency of the economy. Only if CBDC2 takes even much larger
dimensions, such as desired by the promotors of sovereign money, then an issue relating to
the centralization of credit would emerge. For example, in the euro area financial accounts,
as shown in a very simplified way in the financial accounts system above, the full shift of all
sight deposits with banks to CBDC2 (as wished by sovereign money supporters) would
increase the minimum balance sheet of the central bank from EUR 1 trillion to 8 trillion.
Currently, the Eurosystem holds outright policy portfolios of more than 2.5 trillion plus other
318     INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY



securities and foreign reserves of around 1.5 trillion, bringing its actual balance sheet to EUR
4 trillion. Therefore, without additional securities purchases, it would have to provide credit
of around EUR 4 trillion to banks (everything else unchanged), i.e., 20% of the banks’ bal-
ance sheets. This would probably force the ECB to revisit its collateral framework, such as
to accept in addition some asset classes it formerly did not accept, like portfolios of mortgage
loans. If haircuts on loans would be in the order of magnitude of 30%, then banks should
normally be able to provide sufficient collateral for the extended amount of central bank
credit needed (even before they would try to find other financing sources, such as an
increased issuance of equity or of bank bonds to households, and before the central bank
would increase its outright portfolios of government securities). However, it needs to be
acknowledged that the impact of the central bank collateral on asset prices (and yields) would
tend to intensify (see e.g., Bindseil et al. 2017; Nyborg 2016 for discussions on how the col-
lateral framework of the central bank may impact on relative asset prices). Unless one is a
supporter of sovereign money, one will therefore be interested in finding solutions to control
effectively the volume of CBDC, to make sure that it will not lead to any centralization of
the credit allocation process.
   Finally, as noted by Juks (2018: 84), a large shrinkage of the deposit base of banks and a
replacement with other liabilities will also have implications on the ability of banks to fulfill
regulatory liquidity requirements. Indeed, household deposits are treated as a rather stable
liability class in most regulations, such that their decline will tend to make it more difficult
for banks to comply and require possibly further costly adjustments, which could make
maturity transformation more expensive.


                                    BANK RUNS INTO CBDC

Mersch (2018), amongst others, has emphasized the destabilizing effects of CBDC in a finan-
cial crisis, namely its facilitation of a run on the banking system:
   During a systemic banking crisis, holding risk-free central bank issued DBM [CBDC] could
   become vastly more attractive than bank deposits. There could be a sector-wide run on bank
   deposits, magnifying the effects of the crisis. Even in the absence of a crisis, readily convertible
   DBM could completely crowd out bank deposits – putting the existence of the two-tier banking
   system at risk. In this situation, the efficient flow of credit to the economy would likely
   be impaired.

  CPMI-MC (2018: 2) also supports the view that CBDC could make worse bank run
dynamics in a crisis:
   The introduction of a CBDC would raise fundamental issues that go far beyond payment
   systems and monetary policy transmission and implementation. A general purpose CBDC could
   give rise to higher instability of commercial bank deposit funding. Even if designed primarily
   with payment purposes in mind, in periods of stress a flight towards the central bank may occur
   on a fast and large scale, challenging commercial banks and the central bank to manage
   such situations.
                                                                                           WINTER 2019           319


                     Households, pension and investment funds, insurance companies
   Real Assets                   20                       Household Equity         40
   Sight deposits bank 1          2.5 -R1 -R2/2 -R3/2
   Sight deposits bank 2          2.5 +R1 -R2/2 -R3/2     Bank loans                5
   Savings + me deposits          4
   Deposits with central bank                    +R3
   Banknotes                      1       +R2
   Corporate/gvt bonds            7
   Bank bonds and Equity          12
                                                Corporates
   Real assets                 13                        Bonds issued               3
   Sight deposits                2                       Loans                      8
   Savings deposits              1                       Shares / equity            5
                                               Government
   Real assets                    11                        Bonds issued                        9
                                                            Loans                               2
                                               Commercial bank 1
   Loans to Corporates/Gvt/HH          7.5                    Sight deposits             3.5 -R1 -R2/2 – R3/2
   Corp/gvt bonds                      2.5                    Savings + me deposits     2.5
   Central bank deposits                 0                    Bonds and equity issued    3.5
                                                              Central bank credit        0.5 +R1 +R2/2 +R3/2
                                            Commercial bank 2
   Loans to Corporates/Gvt/HH       7.5                  Sight deposits          3.5 +R1 -R2/2 - R3/2
   Corp/gvt bonds                  2.5                   Savings + me deposits 2.5
   Central bank deposits max(0, -(0.5 -R1 +R2/2 +R3/2))  Bonds and equity issued 3.5
                                                              Central bank credit max(0, 0.5 -R1 +R2/2 + R3/2)
                                                      Central Bank
   Credit to banks 0.5 +R1+R2/2+R3/2 +max(0, 0.5 -R1+R2/2+ R3/2) Banknotes issued            1 +R2
                                                                 Deposits of banks max(0, -(0.5-R1+R2/2+R3/2))
   Corp/state bonds                                 0
                                                                 Non-bank deposits           R3
      Figure 2. Financial accounts representation of bank run, distinguishing between three targets of flows.




   Also Mancini-Griffoli et al. (2018: 24–25) discuss this aspect of CBDC, but conclude that
overall these effects are likely to be muted. A run on commercial banks can take three forms
in principle,6 if one makes the distinction from the perspective of where the deposits flow to,
namely: “R1”, into deposits with other banks, i.e., within the banking system; “R2”, into
banknotes, i.e., the classical physical bank run where queues could arise in front of bank
branches and ATMs; “R3”, into non-bank deposits with the central bank, which in the past
decades was limited to deposits of official sector institutions, but in the future could be facili-
tated by CBDC. In the financial accounts below, these three flows are shown as originating
from the household/investment sector. In contrast to Figure 1, two separate banks constituting
the banking system are now distinguished, such as to allow representing R1 (Figure 2).
   Note that R2 and R3 are observable in aggregate accounts while R1 is not. Indeed, R1
does not become visible in the aggregate accounts until the bank benefitting from deposit
inflows has paid back all of its central bank credit. Moreover, R1 would have to be extracted
320      INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY


                                                TABLE 6
                    Indicators of run on bank deposits, 2008 and 2011, Eurosystem

                                                               D in % of Eurosystem balance sheet at
                  D in % of stock at beginning of period              beginning of the period
                                                  Excess                                       Excess
Comparison                                     reserves of                                  reserves of
between                          Excess         non-bank                      Excess         non-bank
December         Banknotes     reserves of      depositors    Banknotes     reserves of      depositors
averages of:    (“R2”) (%)     banks (%)       (“R3”) (%)    (“R2”) (%)     banks (%)       (“R3”) (%)
2008 vs 2007       þ13           þ3675            þ 321         þ7             þ32             þ23
2012 vs. 2010      þ8             þ580            þ151          þ4             þ38             þ10



from the excess reserves of banks, which are also influenced, by R2 and R3 (and, in reality,
there are obviously not only two banks). The table below captures the importance of the three
types of runs, again with the above-mentioned caveat for R1. Moreover, the Eurosystem
somewhat invited the creation of excess reserves in 2011 through particularly attractive credit
operations, so that the increase of excess reserves overestimates the inter-banking system run
(Table 6).
   The table suggests that the contribution of a run from bank deposits into banknotes was
remarkably small compared to the two other factors. The run from weak into strong banks
was clearly the strongest amongst the three, followed by the run into non-bank deposits.
   It may be recalled that the spread between the rate on the ECB’s main refinancing opera-
tions (MRO – conducted as a so-called “fixed rate full allotment”) and the rate of remuner-
ation of excess reserves is the tool to set incentives against a run from deposits with one
bank into the deposits of another bank. However, if anything, the Eurosystem narrowed this
spread during the crisis episodes, relative to the pre-crisis level of 200 basis points, suggest-
ing that trying to prevent a run through price incentives was not considered the right solution
(see e.g., Bindseil and Jablecki 2011).
   To understand better the drivers of R3 over the last decade, the figure below reports the
evolution of three liability positions of the Eurosystem that capture non-bank deposits open
to different public sector entities, namely (according to Annex IV of the ECB’s accounting
guideline, see ECB 2016):

 L.5.1 “General Government. Current accounts, fixed-term deposits, deposits repayable
  on demand”
 L.5.2 “Other liabilities. Current accounts of staff, companies and clients including finan-
  cial institutions listed as exempt from the obligation to hold minimum reserves (see
  liability item 2.1 ‘Current accounts’); fixed-term deposits, deposits repayable on demand”
 L.6 “Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in euro. Current accounts,
  fixed-term deposits, deposits repayable on demand including accounts held for payment
  purposes and accounts held for reserve management purposes: of other banks, central
  banks, international/supranational institutions including the European Commission; cur-
  rent accounts of other depositors. Repo transactions in connection with simultaneous
                                                                           WINTER 2019     321


   reverse repo transactions for the management of securities denominated in euro. Balances
   of TARGET2 accounts of central banks of Member States whose currency is not
   the euro.”

    The figure suggests that the pricing of non-bank deposits by the Eurosystem was not such
as to prevent any increase of non-bank liabilities in each of the three balance sheet expan-
sions over the last years. During the banking crisis in 2008, in particular L6 increased steeply
and rapidly, peaking in December 2008, while L5 increased more gradually. During the sov-
ereign debt crisis, again L6 reached high levels, this time peaking in July 2012. The highest
levels were reached for all three types of deposits during the asset purchase program APP,
with the peaks being reached with the maximum level of APP stocks in December 2018.
    Actually, three special factors have to be distinguished during these phases. First, in par-
ticular during 2008, but also again during 2011–2012, strong perceptions of credit riskiness
with regards to at least parts of the banking system triggered withdrawals of deposits. From
the perspective of the banks with deposit outflows, it makes no particular difference if the
outflows of a certain amount benefit other banks, go to some non-bank deposit account with
the central bank, or take the form of banknotes (as explained above, see also Juks 2018, sec-
tion 5). Second, exceptional levels of central bank rates had implications on the relative
attractiveness of different investments. For example, if the remuneration rate of some non-
bank deposits is set to be zero by the central bank, this may normally, i.e., in the old world
of positive interest rates, have been considered unattractive, and as ensuring that the amounts
deposited will remain low. But once monetary policy interest rates move, contrary to previ-
ous assumptions, to zero or even to below zero, then the previously unattractive (tier two)
non-bank deposit remuneration rates become attractive, until the central bank changes the
rate setting formula to react to the new reality. Indeed, the Eurosystem adjusted its formulas,
although not in a way to prevent fully an increase. Third, exceptional amounts of excess
reserves pushed some short-term market rates to below the level of the deposit facility
accessible to banks. For example, GC repo overnight rates traded in 2017–2018 around 15
basis points below the rate of the deposit facility, which would have been unthinkable in nor-
mal liquidity conditions.
    As mentioned, the Eurosystem would not have needed to tolerate these episodes of
increase of non-bank deposits, i.e., by pricing deposits more aggressively. For example if the
Eurosystem would have remunerated them at 5%, it would have prevented a large increases
of these deposits, as the official sector investors would then have preferred to invest in AAA
rated government bonds. That the Eurosystem did not do so reveals the judgement of the
Eurosystem that the observed increase of non-bank deposits was acceptable both from the
perspective of financial stability and monetary policy (Figure 3).

   A Two-Tier Remuneration System for CBDC

CBDC should be launched only if the central bank can be confident that the issues discussed
in the previous two sections – undesired structural disintermediation of the banking system,
and avoidance in systemic crises of a facilitation of aggregate bank runs – have been solved.
322     INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY




                  Figure 3. Evolution of non-bank deposits with the Eurosystem, 2007–2018.


Supporters of CBDC have acknowledged these issues and, in particular, Kumhof and Noone
(2018) have devoted substantial efforts to design solutions to them. Their approach relies on
four key principles (from their abstract):
   We find that if the introduction of CBDC follows a set of core principles, bank funding is not
   necessarily reduced, credit and liquidity provision to the private sector need not contract, and
   the risk of a system-wide run from bank deposits to CBDC is addressed. The core
   principles are:


  i. CBDC pays an adjustable interest rate.
 ii. CBDC and reserves are distinct, and not convertible into each other.
iii. No guaranteed, on-demand convertibility of bank deposits into CBDC at commercial
     banks (and therefore by implication at the central bank).
iv. The central bank issues CBDC only against eligible securities (principally govern-
     ment securities).


   The final two principles imply that households and firms can freely trade bank deposits against
   CBDC in a private market, and that the private market can freely obtain additional CBDC from
   the central bank, at the posted CBDC interest rate and against eligible securities.


    Kumhof and Noone (2018) correctly identify the issues that need to be addressed. Overall,
it could be perceived that the principles of Kumhof and Noone, while aiming at controlling
the effects of CBDC in a way that CBDC does not undermine too much the existing financial
order, introduce changes to this order which are far reaching. In particular, core principles of
banking and central banking relating to convertibility would be put into question, at least
                                                                               WINTER 2019      323


conditionally. This does not mean that the principles of Kumhof and Noone are unthinkable
or flawed, but that one should try to find lighter solutions to the legitimate concerns regard-
ing uncontrolled CBDC volumes.
    Kumhof and Noone (2018: 34) are well aware of the possibility to address CBDC’s poten-
tial structural and cyclical bank disintermediation through applying unattractive and/or nega-
tive interest rates on CBDC. However, they are skeptical that the tool of negative interest
rates will always be sufficiently effective in crisis times:
  any nascent increase in the demand for CBDC can be eliminated by a drop in the interest rate
  on CBDC. But there are potential limits if this requires a highly negative interest rate, and if
  further reductions of the interest rate below this level become politically difficult … Assume
  therefore a CBDC price rule where the central bank fixes the interest rate on CBDC at the
  lowest politically acceptable level, and assume that even at this penalty rate group A wants to
  convert deposits to CBDC at (almost) any price, perhaps because it is concerned about the
  solvency of banks …

    In this section, it is proposed to solve the problem of political acceptance of (tempor-
arily) very low interest rates on CBDC by differentiating remuneration according to the
amount of deposits held, i.e., “tiering”. Actually, such reserve tiering systems have often
been applied by central banks for the remuneration of deposits, and exactly for the pur-
pose to control the total amount of deposits while being forthcoming towards moderate
levels of deposits. Under such a system, a relatively attractive remuneration rate is
applied up to some quantitative ceiling, while a lower interest rate is applied for amounts
beyond the threshold. The Eurosystem has applied such tiering systems for deposit
accounts of public sector institutions, notably of domestic government and foreign central
banks or sovereign wealth funds. Regarding the remuneration of government deposits, for
example, article 5 of the Eurosystem’s DALM guideline7 specifies that a two-tier system
applies as follows:

1. Remuneration of government deposits shall be subject to the following ceilings: (a) for
   overnight deposits, the unsecured overnight market rate; (b) for fixed term deposits, the
   secured market rate or, if not available, the unsecured overnight market rate.
2. On any calendar day, the total amount of overnight and fixed term deposits of all gov-
   ernments with an NCB exceeding the higher of either: (a) EUR 200 million; or (b) 0.04
   % of the gross domestic product of the Member State in which the NCB is domiciled,
   shall be remunerated with an interest rate of zero per cent. If the deposit facility rate on
   this day is negative, then an interest rate no higher than the deposit facility rate
   shall apply.’

   Similarly, the Eurosystem reserve management services (ERMS8), granting accounts to
foreign central banks and public sector funds, also typically foresee the differentiation
between a more attractive rate applying up to some limit, and a less attractive one with-
out limits. If the remuneration rate for tier two deposits is sufficiently unattractive, then
the amount of such deposits should be low, or even zero. The central bank should also
324     INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY



be able to counter, through an as aggressive as needed lowering of tier two remuneration
rates, the inflow of additional deposits in a financial crisis context.
   One may also note that some central banks (DK, SE, CH, JP) have collected experience
over the last years with a differentiated remuneration of bank deposits with the central bank.
For example, the Bank of Japan introduced on 29 January 2016 a three-tier system (Press
release of the Bank of Japan dated 29 January 2016) following the existence of two-tier
approaches in other central banks:
   The Bank will introduce a multiple-tier system which some central banks in Europe (e.g. the
   Swiss National Bank) have put in place. Specifically, it will adopt a three-tier system in which
   the outstanding balance of each financial institution’s current account at the Bank will be
   divided into three tiers, to each of which a positive interest rate, a zero interest rate, or a
   negative interest rate will be applied, respectively.

   The size of the better remunerated tiers is calculated by the Bank of Japan for each bank
essentially in proportion to the bank’s required reserves, which itself are calculated propor-
tionally to the short-term liabilities of the bank to non-banks. Even before that, a differenti-
ated remuneration had been applied by many central banks for required and non-required
reserves of banks with the central bank. For example, in the case of the Eurosystem, since
the launch of the euro in 1999, required reserves were remunerated at the rate of the main
refinancing operations, while excess reserves were remunerated at zero (and in addition, a
deposit facility was offered which provided remuneration normally at 100 basis points below
the rate of the main refinancing operation).
   In sum: central banks have ample experience with tiered remuneration systems. These could
be readily applied to deposit-based CBDC and could address the structural and the financial
crises related bank disintermediation issues without exposing households using CBDC for pay-
ment purposes to (perceived) final repression. Of course, an undue structural or transitionary
increase in CBDC at the expense of banks could also be addressed by a single tier system in
which the interest rate applied to the entire CBDC deposits would be sufficiently low (or tem-
porarily lowered). However, a two-tier system seems to have important advantages:

 It allows assigning the payment function of money to tier one CBDC, while the store of
  value function would be assigned to tier two, and would essentially be dis-incentivized
  through an unattractive remuneration rate. Indeed, central bank money should probably
  not become a large-scale store of value, i.e. a major form of investment of households,
  as this eventually implies that the central bank would become an investment intermediary
  of the economy (for which it has no particular qualification).
 It ensures that CBDC is attractive to have in principle for all households, as reliance on
  tier one CBDC never needs to be dis-incentivized by a particularly low remuner-
  ation rate.
 A two-tier system allows better steering of the amount of CBDC, which provides
  additional confidence into the manageability of the introduction of CBDC.
 As mentioned above, it avoids that in a crisis situation, one would need to push into
  negative territory the remuneration of all CBDC. Thereby tiering decisively reduces the
                                                                              WINTER 2019      325


   scope for popular criticism of the central bank (e.g. of financial repression, expropriation
   of money holders, etc.). The central bank would need to communicate clearly at an early
   stage that the remuneration of tier-two CBDC is not meant to be attractive, and may be
   made particularly unattractive in a crisis, as needed. For tier one CBDC, the central bank
   can commit to never charge negative rates.

    The central bank can also provide a commitment with regard to the quantity of tier one
CBDC. For example, it could promise always to provide per capita a tier one quota of e.g.,
EUR 3500, implying an amount of total tier one CBDC for households of around EUR 1.2
trillion (assuming an eligible euro area population of 340 million; the allowances of minors
could be either set to zero or they could be allocated to a parent’s CBDC account). To recall:
banknotes in circulation in the euro area are somewhat above EUR 3500 per capita (summing
up currently to around EUR 1.2 trillion); securities holdings of the Eurosystem (including
both investment and policy portfolios) are currently around EUR 3 trillion; and the banking
system has excess reserves close to EUR 2 trillion. Everything else unchanged, there would
thus still be no need for large scale credit operations with banks if CBDC of a total amount of
EUR 1 trillion would be issued now. The central bank could, moreover, commit to increase
the tier one CBDC quota when the amount of banknote in circulation decreases. An amount
of EUR 3500 for tier one CBDC could be interpreted as covering the average monthly net
income of euro area households, such that the normal payment function of money would be
covered. CBDC tier one allowances for companies would not necessarily have to be high, as
it could be argued that the main objective of CBDC is to serve citizens. When estimating how
tier one CBDC allowances would be translated into total CBDC volumes, it should on one
side be taken into account that not all CBDC accounts will be opened rapidly, and maybe
some households will never open an account, or will not hold the full tier one allowance on
the account. On the other side, some households will be willing to hold tier two allowances.
    For corporates (financial non-banks and non-financials), the tier 1 allowance could be set
to zero, or alternatively it could be calculated to be proportional to some measure of their
size and thereby presumed payment needs. Simplicity and controllability of the assignments
would be essential. Foreigners, if allowed to open accounts, should have a tier one ceiling of
zero. Finally, a deposit based CBDC framework could in principle be complemented by an
anonymous token-based CBDC. If so, then the anonymous token-based part would be remun-
erated at the same level as account-based tier two CBDC. Simple solutions (such as a stored
value card like the Oyster card) could be sufficient, for instance, to allow tourists to use
CBDC without having an account. Again, those cards should normally be subject to the tier
two remuneration rate.
    The tier 1 remuneration rate r1 could be set in principle at a relatively attractive level,
which could be the rate of remuneration of banks’ excess reserves, and it would, in addition,
be specified that it could never fall below zero. The tier 2 remuneration rate would be set
such that tier 2 deposits are rather unattractive as store of value, i.e., less attractive than bank
deposits or other short-term financial assets, even when taking into account risk premia. The
two rates could co-move in parallel with policy interest rates, with in addition some special
provision when the zero lower bound territory is approached. The rates would themselves not
326     INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY



be regarded as policy rates. Moving the rates would simply serve keeping a similar spread
over time to other central bank rates, and thus in principle to other market rates. The object-
ive would be to sufficiently stabilize and control over time the incentives to hold CBDC. Of
course, the existence of banknotes, which are invariably remunerated at zero, creates a vari-
able spread between the remuneration of banknotes and CBDC, which may also have quanti-
tative effects on both.
    Initially, for example the following remuneration could be considered by the ECB for tier
1 CBDC: r1 ¼ max(iDFR, 0), and for tier 2 CBDC: r2 ¼ (iDFR – 2%). In words: r1 would
equal the rate of remuneration of excess reserves, with however a zero lower bound applying,
while r2 would be 2% points below the remuneration of excess reserves, but without floor.
An even less attractive option for tier 2 CBDC would be r2 ¼ min(0, iDFR – 2%). In this
case, CBDC2 would be remunerated either like banknotes (as long as DFR > 0) or lower. In
any case, a special downwards adjustment to the remuneration rate of CBDC would likely
have been useful during the critical year after the Lehman default in 2008.
    It would also not be a problem to add a third tier to CBDC with an even lower remuner-
ation, if this is considered useful to achieve an optimal level of control of total CBDC quanti-
ties. For example, the second tier could be three times the first tier, the second tier’s
remuneration could always be kept at (iDFR – 2%), but the third tier could be remunerated
very negatively, say at 3% in normal times, and in crisis times if needed at e.g., 10%.
From a technological perspective, introducing another tier should not be an issue. Obviously,
as long as banknotes exist, CBDC holders can transform badly remunerated CBDC into
banknotes – but if they prefer banknotes to deposits with banks, then they can do so already
today. Finally, as mentioned, a special remuneration rate could also apply to foreign CBDC
depositors, i.e., outside the tiering system, which would apply to domestic households and
enterprises. At the end, the central bank could establish any matrix of remuneration rates,
with one dimension of the matrix capturing the different types of holders, and the other
remuneration rates for the potentially many tiers. The additional complexity implied by such
a matrix would be moderate. Of course, the ambitions of the matrix should remain humble:
to control sufficiently the overall amount of CBDC, while letting different types of entities
benefit from it in a fair manner. Ideally, the matrix would be based on objective criteria, also
to avoid criticism of parties that would feel treated unfavorably.
    In sum: the central bank would have significant degrees of freedom to set the remuner-
ation of tiered CBDC in a way to make CBDC both attractive and controllable,
namely through:

 Distinguishing an attractively remunerated first tier from a less attractively, remunerated
  second tier (and possibly even a third tier with an even worse remuneration, etc.).
 Choosing the size of the tier one allowance per capita. Taking the euro area as example,
  e.g. 1000, 3500, or 5000 euro would imply an amount of tier one CBDC of around 30%,
  100%, and 140% of the current level of euro banknotes in circulation.
 Choosing the remuneration rate of each tier, and in particular of tier two, which could be
  either moderately or clearly unfavorable, whereby the latter case is of course most
                                                                            WINTER 2019     327


  effective to be confident that CBDC volumes will not significantly exceed the total tier
  one CBDC allowance.
 Reserve the right to do further adjustments on the remuneration rate of tier two (and tier
  three, etc.) CBDC if needed, while committing never to remunerate tier one
  CBDC negatively.


              BANK DISINTERMEDIATION WITH LOW-VOLUME CBDC?

The attractiveness of CBDC for payment purposes does not only depend on the amount of
CBDC that would be remunerated at a fairly attractive level, but also on other features of the
use of CBDC as means of payment. It will matter in particular whether account services of
CBDC include the services that deposit accounts with commercial banks typically offer, like
remote internet access, mobile phones and cards, periodic payments to other accounts, debit
orders, user-defined maximums for different types of transfers, etc. The ability to link the
account with the accounts of broker-dealers, which offer a full range of investment services,
will also be relevant. In any case, the central bank would presumably not offer other advanced
banking services (foreign exchange transfers, FX operations, derivatives, etc.). There would
therefore still be a difference relative to the breadth of services by commercial banks.
    If the services offered by the central bank are relatively comprehensive, then, despite an
effective control of the total amount of CBDC at a moderate level, still CBDC risks under-
mining the role of the banking system as a relevant share of households may want to com-
bine a central bank account with the services of a non-bank financial services firm, and no
longer have any bank deposit account. In this case, the length of the central bank balance
sheet may remain limited, but the length of the banks’ balance sheet may decrease at the
benefit of the non-bank financial intermediation through securities-brokers, insurance compa-
nies, and mutual funds.
    The following system of financial accounts illustrates such a case in which the total quan-
tity of CBDC is well controlled, but where, nevertheless, the banking system is disintermedi-
ated because its sight deposits services are no longer needed. The creation of CBDC is now
assumed to be fully at the expense of banknote circulation only, such that it has no effects on
financial accounts of banks (i.e., it is of type CBDC1). The variable SUBST captures the
possible disintermediation of the banking system, in the sense that deposit-taking institutions
could lose clients, for the benefits of non-bank financial services providers. It is assumed that
the benefitting non-bank financial firms would also take over a part of the loan business of
banks, maybe focusing on securitizations of loans or syndicated loans, or financing of large-
scale infrastructure projects etc. The corporate and government sectors are not again shown
as they are assumed to be unaffected (Figure 4).
    To what extent would the disintermediation of banks and the shift of business towards
non-bank financial intermediaries matter? This will also depend on the differences between
the regulatory treatment of commercial banks (deposit taking institutions) and other financial
intermediaries, since regulation creates a clear segregation between the two. The regulator
would, therefore, have to see if any regulatory adjustments may be desirable to react to the
328    INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY



                  Households, pension and investment funds, insurance companies
 Real Assets                         20              Household Equity                                    40
 Sight deposits                      5 -SUBST
 Savings + me deposits              4               Bank loans                                           5
 New non-bank intermediaries            +SUBST
 CBDC                                   +CBDC1
 Banknotes                           1 -CBDC1
 Bank bonds                          4 + S1
 Corporate/state bonds                7 - S1
 Equity                              8
                                      New non-bank intermediaries
 Loans to corporates                        +Subst/2        Household investments                     +Subst
 Corp/gvt bonds                             +Subst/2
                                             Commercial Banks
 Loans to corporates                    8 -Subst /2       Sight deposits                  7 -Subst
 Loans to government                    2                 Savings + me deposits           5
 Loans to HH                            5                 Bonds issued                    4
 Corp/gvt bonds                         5 -Subst /2       Equity                          3
 Central bank deposits                     0              Central bank credit             1
                                               Central Bank
 Credit to banks                      1                   Banknotes issued                  1 -CBDC1
 Corp/gvt bonds                       0                   Deposits of banks                 0
                                                          CBDC                                CBDC1
           Figure 4. Impact on bank funding despite unchanged length of central bank balance sheet.


changes of financial structure caused indirectly by CBDC (see also section 6 of Juks 2018).
Overall, it should be acknowledged that CBDC will be a further factor contributing to change
in the financial system, and to some extent independently of the total volume of CBDC, and
that this may include effects on the relative competitiveness of banks. However, (i) there are
anyway various technological developments that are relevant in this respect beyond CBDC;
(ii) per se, change should not be seen as a problem, but as an opportunity. Legitimate worries
would relate to disruptive change scenarios, which may occur if the change is too rapid.


            FLOW-OF FUNDS COMPARISON OF CBDC WITH PRIVATE
                         DIGITAL CURRENCIES

In this section, we briefly compare the implications of CBDC on financial accounts with the
ones of crypto-assets, stable coins and narrow bank digital currency.


Crypto-Assets

According to ECB Crypto-Assets Task Force (2019: 3), crypto assets are an “asset recorded
in digital form and enabled by the use of cryptography that is not and does not represent a
                                                                             WINTER 2019      329


financial claim on, or a liability of, any identifiable entity”. Moreover, according to this task
force report (3), “Crypto-assets do not fulfill the functions of money and, at the current stage,
neither do they entail a tangible impact on the real economy nor have significant implications
for monetary policy.” The global market capitalization of crypto-assets relative to euro area
GDP has fluctuated since June 2017 between around 1% and around 5% (11). As crypto-
assets are neither a financial claim nor a financial liability, they per se do not affect the
accounts of the financial sector. They only directly affect the accounts of the household /
investment sector, which holds and mines these commodity-like assets (we assume here for
the sake of simplicity that the mining takes place directly by households). To the extent that
“mining” consumes resources, crypto-assets appear (in the simplest representation) as an
asset switch from real assets to crypto assets (CRYPTO.A). To the extent that the value of
the crypto-assets exceeds the mining costs, it is a balance sheet lengthening for households
matched by an increase of net wealth (CRYPTO.B) (Figure 5).
   As noted in the task force report quoted above, crypto-assets are not particularly suitable
as means of payment and store of value (as their value denominated in the unit of account
fluctuates heavily). Therefore, they are not really in competition with banknotes or sight
deposits with banks and, therefore, the secondary effects on the financial system are expected
to remain limited for the foreseeable future.


Stable Coins Backed by Reserves

“Stable coins” are attempts to overcome the extreme volatility of existing crypto-assets by aim-
ing at a stable value (denominated in some unit of account). There is quite some diversity in
stable coins constructions, and “to the extent that they have an identified issuer, are not crypto-
assets according to the definition used in this paper and might qualify as e-money under some
national legislation” (Bullmann et al. 2019; ECB Crypto-Assets Task Force 2019: 14; G7
Working Group on Stablecoins 2019). Recently, central bankers’ interest in stable coins
increased, after Facebook announced its Libra stable coin project (see www.libra.org). As
Libra is planned to be backed fully by liquid and high-quality reserves, it could indeed be inter-
preted to go more in the direction of an e-money institution. Libra would be “stable” in the
currency basket it will replicate, and not in a single currency. Also projects such that “Utility
Settlement Coin” (USC) fall under the stable coin definition (see www.fnality.org).
   Stable coins can be backed by reserves in the form of central bank deposits or in other
forms (deposits with highly rated banks or short-term government securities – the vision of
Libra). The financial accounts below illustrate both cases. As stable coins are much more
suitable as means of payments than crypto-assets (if we assume that they are issued for gen-
eral payment purposes), they would be expected to substitute banknotes and/or sight deposits
with banks or both (similarly to CBDC). The Government and corporate accounts are not
shown as they are expected not to be affected. STC2 are the stable coin holdings that result
from the substitution of sight deposits with banks, and STC1 are those resulting from the
substitution of banknotes. With regards to the case of backing with commercial bank money
and government bills, we assume that the two forms of reserves have a share of a and (1-a),
330     INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY



                  Households, pension and investment funds, insurance companies
 Real Assets                  20 –CRYPTO.A           Household Equity        40 +CRYPTO.B
 Sight deposits                      5               Bank loans                     5
 Savings + me deposits             4
 Crypto-assets             CRYPTO.A +CRYPTO.B
 Banknotes                           1
 Bank bonds                          4
 Corporate/state bonds               7
 Equity                              8
                         Figure 5. Impact of crypto-asset on financial accounts.


respectively. We also assume (for the sake of simplification) that the holdings of government
debt by the stable coin vehicle are coming from former banks’ holdings (and not from house-
hold holdings) (Figure 6 and 7).


The Narrow Bank

A narrow bank is defined here as a bank which would have all the deposits it issues matched
on the asset side with central bank deposits (see also Mancini-Griffoli et al. 2018: 13).
Other assets (physical assets) would be financed with equity. The running costs and the
remuneration of capital would be covered by a spread between the narrow bank deposit rates
and the rates at which the central bank remunerates the reserves of banks. Such a narrow
bank tried to establish itself in the US (www.tnbusa.com). Assume that narrow banks would
issue “narrow bank digital currency” (NBDC) – how would they change the financial sys-
tem? Actually the financial accounts representation is identical to a stable coin backed by
central bank deposits (see above), whereby the role of the stable coin vehicle is taken over
by the narrow bank (i.e., replace in the accounts “Stable coin issuing vehicle” by “Narrow
bank”; “STC1” by “NBDC1”; “STC2” by “NBDC2”) .


Comparison of Private Digital Currency Innovations with CBDC

The following table compares the balance sheet implications of the different schemes on the
banking system, i.e., commercial banks and the central bank. We call X1 the amount of new
means of payments substituting banknotes and X2 the amount of new means of payments
substituting deposits with banks. Similarity in this table does not necessarily imply similarity
in practice, as the success of different schemes may be very different, and thereby the actual
size of X1 and X2. As mentioned, in the case of CBDC, a close control of the amounts
issued is possible through a two-tiered remuneration system.
   Actually, the financial accounts implications have similarities across forms of digital cur-
rencies, and in particular stable coins backed by central bank deposits (“STCCB”), NBDC
and CBDC seem to have identical financial account implications. Of course, in practice, they
                                                                                           WINTER 2019           331


                 Households, pension and investment funds, insurance companies
 Real Assets                        20              Household Equity                                       40
 Sight deposits                     5 - STC2
 Savings + me deposits            4                Bank loans                                               5
 STC                                     STC2+STC1
 Banknotes                                   1 -STC1
 Bank bonds                                  4
 Corporate/state bonds                       7
 Equity                                      8

                                            Stable coin issuing vehicle
 Deposits with banks               α(STC2+STC1)                 STC issued                STC2+STC1
 Government bonds               (1-α)(STC2+STC1)
                                               Commercial Banks
 Loans to corporates                       8                Sight deposits         7 –STC2
 Loans to government                      2                 STC Deposits          α(STC2+STC1 )
 Loans to HH                               5                Savings + me deposits 5
 Corp/gvt bonds             5 – (1-α)(STC2+STC1)            Bonds issued              4
 Central bank deposits                       0              Equity                   3
                                                            Central bank credit      1 -STC1
                                                 Central Bank
 Credit to banks                        1 –STC1             Banknotes issued            1 -STC1
Figure 6. Financial accounts representation of stable coin with reserves in the form of deposits held with commercial
                     banks and in the form of government bonds (e.g., like envisaged by Libra).


will not necessarily be identical since the success of each and the implied volume and dis-
location of the financial accounts may vary.

 First, the confidence of households into STCCB/NBDC schemes will not necessarily be the
  same as the confidence into CBDC. Theoretically, it could be possible that STCCB/NBDC
  benefits from high levels of trust, since the schemes would aim at avoiding any credit and
  liquidity risk. Fraud risk could probably be low, as the vehicles could operate easily in full
  transparency, and emphasize and seek closest co-operation with regulatory authorities.
 Second, the efficiency of STCCB/NBDC might be higher or lower than CBDC. It could
  be higher as STCCB/NBDC could take the form of competing entities, i.e. the market
  mechanism could continue to apply, and the vehicles could be very innovative in offering
  retail payment solutions, or rely on a broad initial global customer basis, such as Libra.
  On the other side, a direct provision by the central bank could also benefit from substan-
  tial economies of scale, and would reduce costs relating to credibility-providing mecha-
  nisms (Klein and Leffler 1981), regulatory compliance, equity, etc.
 Third, the remuneration rate of private digital currencies would be determined by the
  efficiency of competing issuing entities and the rate of remuneration of reserves (be they
  deposits with the central bank or a mixture of other high-quality assets). For example,
  Libra would, according to the Libra white paper, not be remunerated, implying normally
332     INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY



                  Households, pension and investment funds, insurance companies
 Real Assets                          20             Household Equity                                          40
 Sight deposits                      5 - STC2
 Savings + me deposits             4                Bank loans                                                5
 STC                               STC2+STC1
 Banknotes                           1 -STC1
 Bank bonds                          4
 Corporate/state bonds               7
 Equity                               8
                                           Stable coin issuing vehicle
 Deposits with CB                  STC2+STC1                   STC issued                       STC2+STC1
                                               Commercial Banks
 Loans to corporates                      8                 Sight deposits         7 –STC2
 Loans to government                      2                 Savings + me deposits     5
 Loans to HH                              5                 Bonds issued               4
 Corp/gvt bonds                           5                 Equity                     3
                                                            Central bank credit      STC2
                                                 Central Bank
 Credit to banks                           1+ STC2          Banknotes issued         1 -STC1
                                                            Deposits of banks        0
                                                            STC deposits           STC2+STC1
        Figure 7. Financial accounts representation of stable coin holds its reserves with the central bank.

  a positive carry (seignorage), but potentially also a negative carry if global interest rates
  are very low and partially negative. The central bank may choose for CBDC in principle
  any remuneration formula, including tiering systems. In so far, CBDC allows for better
  control. The competitiveness of STCCB/NBDC would also depend on the operational
  framework applied by the central bank, notably whether it operates in a corridor or a
  floor system, with the latter being more favorable to NBDC. A corridor system with a
  sufficient spread (e.g. 100 basis points) between the market overnight target rate and the
  remuneration rate of reserves would reduce the competitiveness of STCCB/NBDC
  schemes relative to the case of a floor system in which market overnight rates would be
  close to the rate of remuneration of reserves.
 Fourth, the regulatory treatment of private digital currencies will matter, as it may con-
  strain their operations or make them more costly.
 Finally, STCCB/NBDC schemes depend on the willingness of the central bank to grant the
  issuer access to central bank deposits. Only if the issuer comes along with a normal banking
  license, the central bank may anyway be obliged to allow it to deposit at standard conditions.

                                              CONCLUSIONS

This article tried further to demystify CBDC, also by representing it in a simple system of
financial accounts, which allows capturing its flow of funds implications. Moreover, the
paper revisited the question how to address the risk, rightly stressed in the literature, that
                                                                                           WINTER 2019        333


CBDC could structurally, or cyclically (in relation to financial crises) disintermediate the
banking system. A simpler and less innovative alternative to the approach of Kumhof and
Noone (2018) is developed, which relies on a tiered remuneration of CBDC, in line with
long-tested central bank logic and practice. To use the terminology of Basil Moore (1988),
the approach proposed here may be considered a “horizontalist” one, which is more instinct-
ive to central bank market operations practitioners, in contrast to the contingent “verticalist”
elements foreseen in Kumhof and Noone (2018). At the same time, it was acknowledged that
the control of CBDC quantities is not equivalent to the control of the impact of CBDC on
the financial system. In particular, CBDC might be a catalyst for the further shrinkage of
bank balance sheets at the benefit of non-bank intermediaries, in particular if CBDC accounts
offer relatively comprehensive account services such that many households may no longer
feel a need to have a bank deposit account.
    As remarked by Carstens (2019: 10), central banks are not there to “put a brake on innova-
tions just for the sake of it”, but to ensure that implications of major changes are well under-
stood so “that innovations set the right course for the economy, for businesses, for citizens, for
society as a whole”. From this perspective, this paper may suggest that central banks could be
somewhat open to studying CBDC, although the overall business case and the precise risks to
change the financial system in a disruptive way deserve further analysis. This conclusion seems
similar to the one of Juks (2018), although Juks is less assertive on the tools to address possible
unwarranted effects of the introduction of CBDC. The overall business case for CBDC will
also still depend on preferences of households as money users and voters. In progressive coun-
tries, in which the demand for banknotes falls rapidly and in which electronic payments have
become the normal, a business case for CBDC seems relatively plausible. The recent take up of
attention devoted to stable coins or related projects such as Libra, and the similarity of financial
accounts implications of stable coins to the ones of CBDC suggests that the discussions on
CBDC should take place also in the context of such private electronic money innovations.


                                          ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Opinions expressed in this paper are my own ones, and not necessarily those of the ECB. I
would like to thank for their helpful comments Lea Bitter, Dirk Bullmann, Benoit Coeure,
Frank Heinemann, Reimo Juks, Michael Kumhof, Clare Noone, Martin Summer, Jens
Tapking, Fabrizio Zennaro, and participants to the 46th Economic Conference of the OeNB
in co-operation with SUERF on 2/3 May in Vienna, participants to the conference on the
Future of Central Banking in Talloires/France on 26 May 2019, as well as members of the
ECB Market Operations Committee. All remaining errors are mine.

                                                    NOTES

1. Recent publications include Engert and Fung (2017), CPMI-MC (2018), Kumhof and Noone (2018), Sveriges
   Riksbank (2018), Armelius et al. (2018), Juks (2018), Nessen, Sellin and Sommar (2018) – see also the further
   literature referenced there. According to the survey of Barontini and Holden (2019: 7), 70% of responding central
334       INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY


     banks are currently engaged in CBDC work. Five central banks would be progressing on, or running pilot
     projects (8).
2.   Of course, it is not excluded that effective solutions preventing money laundering and other illicit activities
     and a high security and control of the circulating amount of CBDC can be achieved with a token CBDC.
     However, as also convincingly argued by Berentsen and Sch€ar (2018), a deposit based CBDC offers simpler
     solutions to all of these issues.
3.   The “sovereign money” idea has nothing to do with “modern monetary theory” (MMT). The former is about
     substituting commercial bank money with central bank money, while the latter is about the interaction between
     monetary and fiscal policy.
4.   Armelius et al. (2018) also consider that the net macro-economic benefits of CBDC depend on the positive
     effects from a more efficient and resilient payment system, against the possible negative effects on credit
     provision and financial stability.
5.   A financial accounts framework to analyse CBDC is also used by Meaning et al. (2018), but more in the form
     of a graphical illustration.
6.   Juks (2018 section 5) also distinguishes three forms of runs, although not identical ones. Still the conclusions
     are rather similar.
7.   GUIDELINE OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK of 20 February 2014 on domestic asset and liability
     management operations by the national central banks (ECB/2014/9), as amended by GUIDELINE OF THE
     EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK of 5 June 2014 amending Guideline ECB/2014/9 on domestic asset and
     liability management operations by the national central banks (ECB/2014/22).
8.   https://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/erms/html/index.en.html

                                                REFERENCES

Armelius, H., P. Boel, C.A. Claussen, and M. Nessen. 2018. “The E-Krona and the Macroeconomy.” Sveriges
   Riksbank (3): 43–65.
Bank of England. 1969. “The Bank of England Note: A Short History.” Quarterly Bulletin 211–L.
Barrdear, J., and M. Kumhof. 2016. “The Macroeconomics of Central Bank Issued Digital Currencies.” Bank of
   England Staff Working Paper No. 605.
Barontini, C., and H. Holden. 2019. “Proceeding with Caution – a Survey on Central Bank Digital Currencies.” BIS
   Paper No. 101.
Benes, J., and M. Kumhof. 2012. “The Chicago Plan Revisited.” IMF WP/12/202.
Berentsen, A., and F. Sch€ar. 2018. “The Case for Central Bank Electronic Money and the Non-Case for Central
   Bank Cryptocurrencies.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 100: 97–106.
Bindseil, U. 2019. Central Banking Before 1800: A Rehabilitation. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
   forthcoming.
Bindseil, U., and J. Jablecki. 2011. “The Optimal Width of the Central Bank Standing Facilities Corridor and
   Banks’ Day-to-Day Liquidity Management.” ECB Working Paper Series No. 1350.
Bindseil, U., M. Corsi, B. Sahel, and A. Visser. 2017. “The ECB Collateral Framework Explained.” ECB
   Occasional Paper No. 189.
B€usch, J. G. 1801. S€amtliche Schriften €
                                         uber Banken und M€  unzwesen—Abhandlungen von den Banken. Hamburg:
   Carl Ernst Bohn.
Bullmann, D., A. Klemm, and A. Pinna. 2019. “In Search for Stability in Crypto-Assets: Are Stablecoins the
   Solution?” ECB Occasional Paper No. 230.
Carstens, A. 2019. “The Future of Money and Payments.” Speech Held in Dublin, March 22.
Costabile, L., and E. Nappi. 2018. “The Public Banks of Naples between Financial Innovation and Crisis.” In
   Financial Innovation and Resilience. A Comparative Perspective on the Public Banks of Naples (1462–1808), ed.
   L. Costabile and L. Neal, 55–70. Palgrave Studies in the History of Finance. Basingstoke: Palgrave-Macmillan.
CPMI-MC. 2018. “Central Bank Digital Currencies.” Join report by the Committee on Payments and Market
   Infrastructures and the Markets Committee. Basel: Bank of International Settlement.
Deutsche Bundesbank. 1976. Deutsches Geld- und Bankwesen in Zahlen 1876–1975. Statistischer Beiband zur
   Bundesbank - Festschrift, W€ahrung und Wirtschaft 1876 – 1975. Frankfurt am Main: Deutsche Bundesbank.
                                                                                            WINTER 2019         335


Dunbar, C. F. 1906. Chapters on the Theory and History of Banking. Second enlarged edition, ed. O.M.W. Sprague:
   New York and London: Sprague, G.P. Putman’s Sons.
Dyson, B., and G. Hodgson. 2016. Digital Cash: Why Central Banks Should Start Issuing Electronic Money.
   London: Positive Money.
ECB Crypto-Assets Task Force. 2019. “Crypto-Assets: Implications for Financial Stability, Monetary Policy, and
   Payments and Market Infrastructures.” ECB Occasional Paper. No. 223.
Engert, Walter, and Ben S. Fung. 2017. “Central Bank Digital Currencies: Motivations and Implications.” Staff
   Discussion Paper 2017–16. Bank of Canada.
European Central Bank. 2016. Guideline (EU) 2016/2249 of the European Central Bank of 3 November 2016 on the
   legal framework for accounting and financial reporting in the European System of Central Banks (ECB/2016/34)
   (recast), published in the Official Journal of the European Union L 347/37, 20 December 2016.
G7 Working Group on Stablecoins. 2019. “Investigating the Impact of Global Stablecoins.” Joint group by the BIS,
   CPMI, IMF, and G7.
H€aring, N. 2018. Die Abschaffung des Bargelds und die Folgen [The Abolition of Cash and the Consequences].
   Bastei L€ubbe Taschenbuch.
Huber, J. 1999. “A Proposal for Supplying the Nations with the Necessary Means in a Modern Monetary System.”
   Der Hallesche Graureiher :99–93. Revised version October 1999.
Jobst, C., and H. Stix. 2017. “Doomed to Disappear? The Surprising Return of Cash across Time and Across
   Countries.” CEPR Paper : DP12327.
Juks, R. 2018. “When a Central Bank Digital Currency Meets Private Money: Effects of an E-Krona on Banks.”
   Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2018 (3):79–98.
Klein, B., and K. B. Leffler. 1981. “The Role of Market Forces in Assuring Contractual Performance.” Journal of
   Political Economy 89 (4):615–641. doi: 10.1086/260996.
Kumhof, M., and C. Noone. 2018. “Central Bank Digital Currencies - Design Principles and Balance Sheet
   Implications.” Bank of England Staff WP No. 725.
Mancini-Griffoli, T., M. S. Martinez Peria, I. Agur, J. Kiff, A. Popescu, and C. Rochon. 2018. “Casting Light on
   Central Bank Digital Currency.” IMF Staff Discussion Note, August 18.
Mayer, T., and R. Huber. 2014. Vollgeld. Das Geldsystem der Zukunft. Unser Weg aus der Finanzkrise [Full of
   Money. The Monetary System of the Future. Our Way out of the Financial Crisis]. Tectum.
Meaning, J., J. Barker, E. Clayton, and B. Dyson. 2018. “Broadening Narrow Money: Monetary Policy with a
   Central Bank Digital Currency.” Bank of England Staff Working Paper, No. 724.
Mersch, Y. 2018. “Virtual or Virtueless? The Evolution of Money in the Digital Age.” Lecture at the Official
   Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum, London, February 8.
Moore, B. 1988. Horizontalists and Verticalists: The Macroeconomics of Credit Money. Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Nessen, M., P. Sellin, and P.A. Sommar. 2018. “The Implications of an E-Krona for the Riksbank’s Operational
   Framework for Implementing Monetary Policy.” Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 3: 29–42.
Nyborg, K. 2016. Collateral Frameworks: The Open Secret of Central Banks. Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
Pollock, Alex J. 2018. “Testimony to the Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and Trade of the Committee on Financial
   Services”, United States House of Representatives, Hearing on “The Future of Money: Digital Currency”, July 18.
Reichsbank. 1925. Die Reichsbank 1901–1925. Berlin: Druckerei der Reichsbank.
Rogoff, K. 2016. The Curse of Cash. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Roberds, J., and F. Velde. 2014. “Early Public Banks.” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper Series,
   2014-9.
Saville, R. 1996. Bank of Scotland, A History, 1695–1995. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Sveriges Riksbank. 2018. The Riksbank’s e-krona project – Report 2, October.
Ugolini, S. 2017. The Evolution of Central Banking: Theory and History. Palgrave Studies in Economic History.
   London: Palgrave-Macmillan.
Ulens, R. 1908. Les banques d’emission. [The Issuing Banks]. Etudes         historiques et de legislation comparee
   [Historical studies and comparative legislation]. Brussels: Hayez.
Van Dillen, J. G. 1934. “The Bank of Amsterdam.” In History of the Principal Public Banks, ed. J. G. Van Dillen,
   79–123. Lieden: Nijhoff.
