China Economic Journal

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rcej20

China, the United States, and central bank digital
currencies: how important is it to be first?
Martin Chorzempa
To cite this article: Martin Chorzempa (2021) China, the United States, and central bank
digital currencies: how important is it to be first?, China Economic Journal, 14:1, 102-115, DOI:
10.1080/17538963.2020.1870278
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/17538963.2020.1870278

Published online: 05 Jan 2021.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 2378

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcej20

CHINA ECONOMIC JOURNAL
2021, VOL. 14, NO. 1, 102–115
https://doi.org/10.1080/17538963.2020.1870278

China, the United States, and central bank digital currencies:
how important is it to be first?
Martin Chorzempa
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, USA
ABSTRACT

KEYWORDS

In only a few years, central bank digital currencies (CBDC) have
gone from a fringe idea promoted by cryptocurrency bloggers to an
idea being seriously explored by 80% of the world’s major central
banks, including the People’s Bank of China and the United States
Federal Reserve. This paper gives an overview of the drive at the
world’s central banks to evaluate CBDCs and examines the reasons
behind the world’s two leading economies’ stark divergence in
central bank digital currency development. China committed much
earlier to launching a CBDC, doing so in early 2016, and has since
taken more concrete steps towards piloting and issuing a CBDC
than the Fed, which has yet to commit to ever issuing one.

cryptocurrency; digital
currency; central banks;
monetary policy; payments

This article then critiques the common framing of CBDC development as a race and
explores the implications of China becoming a first mover for both countries and the
global monetary system, including the role of the Dollar and RMB internationally. China
has already begun retail pilots and is likely to be the first major economy to widely issue
a CBDC. It concludes that a first mover advantage in CBDC is likely to be short lived due
to the rapid changes in the technology and likely also in the global marketplace for digital
currencies. In addition, it hypothesizes that the Federal Reserve may not be as far ‘behind’
China in understanding digital currency as it might appear from their different public
response to CBDC.

What is a CBDC and who needs one?
This article will focus on retail central bank digital currencies, which the IMF defines as
“a widely accessible digital form of fiat money (available to the public) that could be legal
tender. Such CBDC would be a central bank liability and form part of the base money
supply,” (Kiff et al. 2020). Many central banks began researching CBDCs around 2016,
but back then they were generally exploring wholesale versions not available to the
general public that could employ distributed ledger technology in back end payment
systems to hopefully gain payments efficiency and resiliency.
The motivations for exploring or launching CBDCs varies by country, but there is
significant commonality. One of the primary motivations has been the rise of the digital
CONTACT Martin Chorzempa
Washington, DC 20036, USA

mchorzempa@piie.com

© 2021 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

Peterson Institute for International Economics,

CHINA ECONOMIC JOURNAL

103

5

01.05.2020

01.03.2020

01.01.2020

01.11.2019

01.09.2019

01.07.2019

01.05.2019

01.03.2019

01.01.2019

01.11.2018

01.09.2018

01.07.2018

01.05.2018

01.03.2018

01.01.2018

01.11.2017

01.09.2017

01.07.2017

01.05.2017

01.03.2017

01.01.2017

01.11.2016

01.09.2016

01.07.2016

01.05.2016

-5

01.03.2016

0

01.01.2016

Net Senment in Central Banker
Speeches

10

-10

-15

-20

Figure 1. Speeches on CBDC have turned more positive since late 2018. Source: R Auer, G Cornelli and
J Frost, ‘The rise of central bank digital currencies: drivers, approaches and technologies’, BIS Working
Paper, no. 880.

economy around the world, which has driven a decline in the use of cash in many
countries. Physical cash is a free, nearly anonymous payment tool provided by central
banks, which now hope to update it to provide a public payment instrument with similar
attributes that can also be used for digital payments. Many hope to expand financial
inclusion with a CBDC, as well as generate significant savings over the current costs of
handling and distributing physical cash, especially in remote areas.
Interest in retail CBDCs spiked after Facebook released the Libra White Paper in 2019,
which proposed a global reserve-backed stablecoin and payment system that would make
sending money as easy as sending a message or digital photograph. Libra appeared to
usher in a coming era in which private sector actors with global scale compete with
sovereign money. Many central banks saw Libra as threatening their monetary sover­
eignty due to its separate unit of account and potential for facilitating capital flight. The
result was a ‘tipping point’ for central bank interest in CBDCs (Auer, Cornelli, and Frost
2020). A Bank for International Settlements (BIS) analysis of senior central bank officials’
speeches on CBDC (Figure 1) show little interest until early 2017, followed by a strong
negative sentiment. That turns around, however, in late 2019, when central bankers had
thoroughly digested the Libra plans and their implications. Sentiment then turned
significantly positive on net (Auer, Cornelli, and Frost 2020).
The Bank for International Settlements’ most recent survey of central banks on
CBDCs found that at least 80% are doing some work, like research and experiments on
CBDCs, but only 10% have progressed to more concrete pilot tests or advanced devel­
opment. Interestingly, it found that ‘every central bank that has progress to development
or a pilot project is an EME (emerging market economy) institution’ (Boar, Holden, and
Wadsworth 2020).

Divergent timelines
A comparison between China and the United States of official statements and updates on
digital currency research from the People’s Bank of China and the Federal Reserve, along
with the evolving consideration of whether to commit to launching a CBDC, is illumi­
nating. China was much faster to make such a commitment, a fact recognized by top

104

M. CHORZEMPA

Federal Reserve officials, who nevertheless implicitly reject being in any race to be the
first to issue a CBDC. Nevertheless, neither central bank is willing to risk falling behind
the frontier of CBDC development due to its strategic implications.

China
The People’s Bank of China has been at the forefront of CBDC research for years, and it is
one of the first central banks to declare an intention to launch one. It formed a dedicated
research team to focus on digital currencies in 2014, following a speculative boom in
which Chinese demand for Bitcoin drove a global spike in its prices. Bitcoin’s popularity
there in 2013 made many wonder if China would be the first country where Bitcoin could
become a commonly used medium of exchange – a dangerous prospect from the PBOC’s
perspective in terms of its ability to implement monetary policy.
Chinese authorities quickly recognized the drawbacks of unregulated digital curren­
cies, from capital flight to tax evasion and risks of financial instability due to Bitcoin’s
wildly fluctuating prices, so they implemented strict regulations in December 2013 to
limit any threat Bitcoin could have to China’s financial system or the RMB’s role as sole
currency. The technology, including blockchain and distributed ledgers (DLT) for
currency and payments, however, clearly had promise and deserved further study.
Less than 2 years after its research began, in January 2016, the PBOC officially
announced a ‘strategic goal’ of launching a CBDC, which it said would be of ‘deep
historical significance.’ It tasked its research group with preparing to ‘launch the CBDC
soon,’ (People’s Bank of China 2016). The statement laid out a long list of advantages
that a CBDC would bring, including financial inclusion, more efficient payments,
reducing the costs of issuing and managing paper cash, giving the PBOC more control
over the money supply, and cutting down on crimes like tax evasion and money
laundering. Interestingly, and in contrast to speeches soon after from top Federal
Reserve officials, the announcement did not list a single potential risk or drawback to
launching a CBDC.
In 2017, the PBOC both intensified its research efforts to develop its CBDC, later
dubbed DC/EP for ‘digital currency/electronic payment’ and asserted more control over
other digital currencies. At the time, the second major global wave of cryptocurrency
speculation was raging in the form of both spiking prices for Bitcoin and Ethereum and
a boom in Initial Coin Offerings or ‘ICO’s,’ which offered to sell newly minted digital
currencies to speculators. The PBOC and other regulators quickly banned ICOs in one of
the harshest regulatory approaches in the world, and soon after kicked cryptocurrency
exchanges that made digital currencies accessible to the general public out of the country,
making it clear that only digital currency issued or effectively regulated by the PBOC
could circulate in China.
The PBOC was in a much better position than most central banks to respond to Libra,
because it already had years of dedicated research, commitment to launching its own
digital currency, and internal trials completed. While others scrambled to set up research
groups, Mu Changchun, then deputy director of the PBOC’s payment and settlement
department, announced that DC/EP was ‘almost ready,’ signaling that China was not
behind Facebook in the digital currency competition (Mu 2019).

CHINA ECONOMIC JOURNAL

105

At the same time, the Libra announcement pushed the PBOC to accelerate its
CBDC efforts. Mr. Mu said that PBOC staff on the DC/EP project were working the
famously grueling ‘996’ (9am-9pm, 6 days per week) schedule, common in China’s
technology sector, to move faster. He also said his announcement was ‘a manifestation
of our response to Libra.’ Other high level PBOC officials explicitly framed the
situation as a race with both Facebook and the US Dollar, which they assumed were
linked due to the dollar’s naturally large role in the Libra currency basket. Wang Xin,
head of the PBOC’s research bureau, said in a speech at the time that ‘We had an early
start . . . but lots of work is needed to consolidate our lead,’ and warned that
a successful Libra could reinforce a monetary system with ‘one boss, the Dollar,
America,’ (Wang 2019).
In April 2020, the PBOC then announced its most significant step yet, a set of
coming retail trials in four cities to take place in preparation for the 2020 Olympics.
Nevertheless, PBOC Governor Yi Gang cautioned in a Caixin interview at the time that
‘the current experimental tests . . . do not at all mean that we are officially launching
issuance of the digital RMB. There is no timetable for when it will be officially
introduced’ (Yi 2020a).
The trials have already reached a significant scale, according to the PBOC. Governor
Yi announced on 1 November 2020 that 4 million transactions with the new currency,
adding up to 2 billion RMB, had already been transacted (Yi 2020b). Little information is
publicly available on the trials outside of those in Shenzhen and Suzhou, both of which
chose regular people by lottery as participants, ‘airdropping’ currency into new pilot
wallets that could be used in designated specific areas of the city during the trial. The
Shenzhen trial only included online payment functionality, generally using QR codes like
Alipay and WeChat Pay do, while Chinese media reported that the Suzhou trial would
include the ability to make near field communications (NFC)-based payments offline.
This feature is interesting because it is designed to eventually include people in rural
areas without reliable internet access, for whom current mobile payment tools do not
work well.
The PBOC has also taken concrete action to ensure that the digital RMB fits solidly in
China’s legal framework. Proposed revisions to China’s Central Bank Law in
October 2020, if adopted, would officially recognize the digital form of the RMB and
ban circulation of tokens/digital currencies that could compete with either form of the
digital RMB (People’s Bank of China 2020).
What is publicly known about DC/EP at this point relies heavily on remarks from
a variety of PBOC officials in interviews with Chinese media or speeches reported by such
media. The piecemeal nature of this communication, compared to, for example,
a comprehensive white paper, makes it difficult to assess the extent of remaining work
to be done. Thorny but critical design choices around how user data will be handled; the
role that existing payment institutions like Alipay and WeChat Pay will play in the
system; the economic incentives of the various actors; how a ‘technologically neutral’
system, as the PBOC has called it, will work in practice; and whether or when DC/EP will
be able to be used abroad all either remain to be finalized or have not been announced.
There still appears to be no timeline for widespread issuance of DC/EP, though the PBOC
appears to be in the final stages of preparation before launch. It is one of few countries in
the world that has advanced to this stage.

106

M. CHORZEMPA

United States
In stark contrast to China, the United States has consistently held a more skeptical official
stance towards launching a CBDC, though like the PBOC it has paid close attention to
developments in digital currency, blockchain, and DLT. An analysis of speeches and
remarks from top Federal Reserve officials does suggest that the US stance has become
significantly more positive since 2019, in line with global trends, but the United States
still has not committed to launching a digital currency at any point.
Researchers at both the Federal Reserve Board of Governors in Washington, DC and
at the regional reserve banks began paying attention to digital currencies early, publish­
ing research on bitcoin and related topics when global interest in cryptocurrency surged
in 2013 (Velde 2013; Badev and Chen 2014). At least by early 2016, the Fed had a working
group focused on fintech that included a focus on distributed ledger technology and
digital currencies. At that time, observers outside government proposed the idea for
a ‘FedCoin’ issued by the Federal Reserve (Koning 2014), but the idea gained no traction
within the Fed or US Government. While China had already announced its intention to
launch a CBDC in early 2016, Fed Governor Lael Brainard did not even mention CBDCs
in an April 2016 speech on DLT, and she signaled a cautious approach towards replace­
ment of legacy infrastructure in the kind of areas CBDC would operate in, advocating for
‘incremental change or delayed adoption until the technology has achieved greater
maturity and standardization may be more likely,’ (Brainard 2016a). Later in 2016,
a Fed Staff Discussion Note and another speech from Governor Brainard came out on
DLT without mentioning CBDC (Brainard 2016b; Mills et al. 2016).
One of, if not the earliest, official Fed mention of CBDCs came in March 2017, when
Governor and soon to be Chairman Jerome Powell called it a ‘fascinating idea,’ (Powell
2017). However, his opinion on CBDCs was the opposite of that in the PBOC’s
announcement the year before. Powell did not mention a single benefit for CBDCs,
instead focusing on the difficulty of keeping the system secure from cyberattacks and the
risk of facilitating illegal activity like money laundering, among other risks and draw­
backs. It is illuminating that Powell mentioned CBDC drawbacks that demonstrate
differences in Chinese and American government thinking about important trade-offs.
The first is privacy, where Powell expressed an unease with a government entity like the
central bank holding the kind of granular transaction data on individuals that centralized
control over a CBDC ledger would provide, which is less of a concern for Chinese
policymakers. He also suggested that private sector actors may be better placed to provide
the service that a CBDC would provide and warned that government competing in the
payments market with a CBDC ‘may stifle innovation over the long run.’
Then-outgoing Fed Chair Janet Yellen expressed a similar view in December 2017,
saying that although other central banks may be exploring CBDCs, ‘this is not something
the Federal Reserve is seriously considering at this stage while we’re looking at research
on this topic. There are . . . limited benefits from introducing it, a limited need for it, and
some substantial concerns. And so I would really doubt that the Federal Reserve would
soon go in that direction,’ (Yellen 2017).
The skepticism continued into the following year, when Governor Lael Brainard said
that the ‘appeal [of CBDCs] may not withstand closer scrutiny.’ She also underscored the
risk of disintermediation and exacerbating runs on the banking system, while reiterating

CHINA ECONOMIC JOURNAL

107

some of the concerns Powell had mentioned (Brainard 2018). However, her speech also
marked the first positive assessment of CBDCs, at least on the wholesale side. She said, ‘a
limited central bank digital instrument that serves as a settlement asset for wholesale
payment and settlement activity may hold some promise . . . We are also interested in
work that decouples the underlying distributed ledger technology from cryptocurrencies
and attempts to build on the benefits of the technology.’ The generally negative tone
towards CBDCs had thus shifted to openness to explore use of the technology, at least for
the back end of payments infrastructure.
After Libra’s announcement, however, the view at the Federal Reserve slowly changed.
Initially, when asked about the threat Libra could pose to central banks, Chair Powell
said, “we’re a long way from that and asserted that ‘digital currencies are in their infancy,’
(Powell 2019a). However, as global discussions about Libra among central banks and
other regulators intensified, Governor Brainard said in a speech in October 2019,
‘Facebook’s Libra imparts urgency to the debate over what form money can take, who
or what can issue it, and how payments can be recorded and settled,’ and that the
‘potential for global stablecoin systems has intensified the interest in central bank digital
currencies,’ (Brainard 2019).
She acknowledged the new momentum towards CBDCs, saying ‘some jurisdictions
may move in this [CBDC development] direction faster than others, based on the
particular attributes of their payments and currency systems,’ and noted that the Fed
would not be one of the early movers. She defended the current US financial system’s
‘compelling advantages’ that vitiated the need for a CBDC compared to other countries,
like continued strong demand for physical cash, the dominant position of the dollar that
would make it less vulnerable to disruptions from stablecoins, and the advanced nature of
the US banking and payment systems. Though framed as a discussion of the status quo’s
advantages, reading between the lines suggests the first hint of a more defensive tone in
which the decision not to issue a CBDC had to be justified, instead of the converse.
At this point, pressure built up from outside the Federal Reserve to explore a CBDC
more seriously. In September 2019, two congressmen wrote to Chair Powell that ‘. . . it
may become increasingly imperative that the Federal Reserve take up the project of
developing a U.S. dollar digital currency,’ and said the ‘Federal Reserve . . . has the ability
and the natural role to develop a national digital currency,’ (Hill and Foster 2019). Powell
responded that ‘we are not currently developing [a CBDC],’ but revealed that the Fed was
‘conducting small-scale, research-oriented technology experiments’ that would position
the Fed to react quickly to ‘rapid developments in this area.’ He also for the first time
acknowledged potential benefits of CBDCs for “safer, less expensive, faster, or otherwise
more efficient payments (Powell 2019b). Still, there was no urgency, as Treasury
Secretary Steven Mnuchin said he and Chair Powell ‘both agree that in the near future,
in the next 5 years, we see no need for the Fed to issue a digital currency,’ (Mnuchin
2019).
In January 2020, Former Commodity Futures Trading Commission Chairman
Christopher Giancarlo launched the Digital Dollar Foundation to advance research on
a blockchain-based CBDC for the Dollar. He raised the alarm about new digital curren­
cies, including the digital RMB, that could ‘erode the dollar’s status’ as the dominant
currency if the Fed does not embrace blockchain (Christopher and Gorfine 2019). The
Digital Dollar Project, however, has no official relationship with the Fed or US

108

M. CHORZEMPA

government more generally, so its views should not be viewed as indicative of any
intention of the Federal Reserve to issue a CBDC.
The slightly more positive view on CBDCs from official Fed sources, however,
continued to build and add a hint of geopolitical consideration into what had looked
publicly to be strictly technical and financial deliberations. In February, Governor
Brainard for the first time mentioned China’s CBDC plans, which were ‘moving ahead
rapidly’ followed by a statement that ‘Given the dollar’s important role, it is essential that
we remain on the frontier of research and policy development regarding CBDC,’
(Brainard 2020a). While it is not explicitly stated, the juxtaposition of these two ideas
suggests that the Fed had begun to seriously consider the potential impact of China’s
leading CBDC position on the role of the dollar.
The tone had also shifted considerably from past speeches. Rather than focusing on
the risks and drawbacks, Brainard’s list of considerations focused on evaluating CBDC
benefits and ‘what would be required in terms of cross-border cooperation for CBDCs to
address current frictions and reduce costs.’ Worries about privacy transformed into
a discussion of how to regulate intermediaries in a CBDC system, and worries about
accelerating bank runs transformed into suggesting that solutions have been developed to
solve the problem. The Fed had become much more open to the prospect of a CBDC,
even if its leadership was not yet convinced that the US should issue one.
In another speech in August 2020, while still not committing to launching a CBDC,
Governor Brainard revealed one of the most important concrete steps towards a CBDC,
a collaboration between the Regional Fed in Boston and the Digital Currency Institute
(DCI) at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) to ‘build and test
a hypothetical digital currency oriented to central bank uses,’ (Brainard 2020b).
Importantly, that CBDC being explored would be a general purpose retail CBDC, not
the wholesale CBDC mentioned years earlier as having potential. She also once again
mentioned China’s CBDC plans, signaling that the Fed was aware of the DC/EP initiative
and following it closely. The speech, coming 2 months before the proposed revisions to
China’s Central Bank Law, noted that the Federal Reserve was not yet ready ‘to undertake
such a significant policy process.’
According to the most recent statements, the Fed still has yet to decide whether to
issue a CBDC. Chair Powell at the IMF/World Bank Fall Meetings in October did,
however, continue the positive shift as he broadened the discussion of potential benefits
beyond payments efficiency to financial inclusion. While continuing to underscore the
importance of the Fed being at the frontier of CBDC research, he said it is ‘more
important for the United States to get it right than it is to be first.’ On the one hand,
that statement is consistent with the approach the Fed followed for years, recognizing
that other countries will move first due to their different domestic considerations and
that the Fed does not necessarily consider that to be a problem.

Comparison
The above analysis demonstrates that China committed much earlier to launching
a CBDC, and it has moved much further towards launching one for widespread retail
use. Even if China’s early commitment to CBDC does not make it the first major
economy to launch one, it will do so long before the United States. China has begun

CHINA ECONOMIC JOURNAL

109

retail-facing pilots that have handled millions of transactions, while the US Federal
Reserve has only recently announced that it is seriously exploring design choices for
a hypothetical CBDC.
Nevertheless, caution is warranted in any comparative analysis about a subject in
which the public-facing statements and trials are only the tip of the iceberg in comparison
to the research, knowledge, and trials that are internal to each central bank and govern­
ment. The Federal Reserve’s caution in public statements and its skepticism about
launching its own CBDC should not necessarily be read as it being ‘behind,’ especially
because remaining at the frontier of developments in digital currencies has appeared as
a priority for years in Fed speeches. It and the US Treasury may not be behind the PBOC
at all when it comes to understanding the implications and other issues around CBDCs,
though its thinking about trade-offs is clearly different.
Observers should not conflate internal knowledge of technology with commitment to
a certain course of action with regards to its utilization, and it is also important to
reiterate that DC/EP remains theoretical until it is finalized. Nevertheless, the PBOC’s
retail trials will certainly generate useful learning that can only be gained by advancing to
public-facing experiments, a step that few countries have been willing to take thus far.

What explains the difference?
The further lengths to which China has gone towards committing to and developing
a retail CBDC is consistent with the international landscape with respect to CBDCs.
China shares characteristics with the broader set of countries that committed early to
CBDCs, while the US fits more with those that have been more cautious. China’s
pioneering efforts and the US’ caution is also consistent with their respective approaches
to financial technology over the years.
The BIS’ systematic work documenting CBDC research and development efforts
around the world has found that nearly no advanced economies (AEs) like the US have
committed to launching retail CBDCs or launched pilots, while emerging market econo­
mies (EMEs) like China are much more likely to have done so. The motivations are
broadly similar across AEs and EMEs for pursuing CBDC research, but EMEs tend to
have a stronger focus on financial inclusion and improvement in payment efficiency
domestically, where there is generally a significant gap with levels seen in advanced
economies (Auer, Cornelli, and Frost 2020).
China’s early commitment to CBDC makes even more sense when considering how
Chinese policymakers have approached other fintech innovations. Starting in the mid2000s, the PBOC purposely left the then-nascent online payments market unregulated
for half a decade, helping it grow without the constraints that pre-determined rules and
entry requirements would have imposed. In 2013, when calls to restrain fintech upstarts
that had just begun to compete with banks for funds intensified, then-PBOC Governor
Zhou Xiaochuan outlined the regulatory approach, ‘We should start by welcoming
technological development. When they first come out, we can’t always make these things
clear, nor do we know the next step in its dynamic development, so we first want as much
as possible to take a positive attitude and give them some space,’ (Xiaochuan 2013).
China pioneered a strategy of giving large technology companies licenses in areas like
banking, insurance, securities, credit scoring, lending, and more, even though the

110

M. CHORZEMPA

consequence and risks were largely unknown. Since then, China has come to the
forefront of financial technology development and experimentation, with by far the
largest fintech market in the world. This is in large part thanks to the willingness of
regulators like Governor Zhou to take risks on new technology and business models that
held promise to quickly develop a lagging financial system. Some of those models, like
peer-to-peer lending, have failed at a great social cost, but other more important
innovations, like online QR code-based payments with Alipay and WeChat Pay, have
become global leaders inspiring other countries to follow their example.
The United States, on the other hand, has done little to adapt its regulatory system,
largely deeming the potential benefit of any major changes not worth the risk. Its
approach has been the opposite of that extolled by Governor Zhou. Initiatives like
a proposed Fintech Charter from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)
that would create a special regulatory regime for fintech companies have been tied up in
debates and court challenges for years, and for better or for worse, regulators have also
made few adjustments to prevailing regulations to fit new business models like market­
place lending. Digital payments in the US have grown, but most Americans pay with the
same plastic cards they used decades earlier, unable even to upgrade many transactions to
more secure chip cards. Meanwhile, China leapfrogged directly to mobile payments from
cash in a few short years.
This difference in fintech approach is similar to the considerations driving CBDC
adoption. When the incumbent financial system is more developed with respect to
inclusion, efficiency, robustness, and cost, there is less incentive to take unknown risks
with new technology in the hopes of solving problems in the financial system. The
risk, however, of excessive risk aversion, is that it can breed complacency and
stagnation.

There is no CBDC ‘Race’
Observers are strongly tempted to frame most US–China issues around a ‘race,’ but this is
not necessarily appropriate in the CBDC context. A race analogy is only relevant if there
is some consensus around the location of the finish line, which in this case would mean
consensus among observers and central banks that it is desirable to launch a retail CBDC.
Yet only 30% of central banks the BIS surveyed indicated that they plan to issue a CBDC
in the next 6 years (Boar, Holden, and Wadsworth 2020), which suggests that no such
consensus exists.
Central banks considering CBDCs are generally approaching the subject by starting
with a set of objectives, and then considering a wide variety of solutions not limited to
but including CBDC (Kiff et al. 2020). For example, the Federal Reserve is not simply
leaving the financial system to its own devices. It is actively working on a faster
payment system called FedNow, which may obviate the need for a CBDC to achieve
faster and cheaper retail payments. As voiced by Chairman Powell, the US may also
choose to leave certain functions to the private sector that China aims to have the
public sector provide. For these and other reasons, Federal Reserve officials explicitly
rejected the framing of CBDC development as a race. Their assessment remains that
CBDC is not the best way to achieve their goals for the US financial system, even if it is
the best way forward for China.

CHINA ECONOMIC JOURNAL

111

Potential impact on the RMB’s international role and the US Dollar
In evaluating the importance of China’s advanced position in CBDCs, it is useful to
consider whether there is a first mover advantage in CBDC development, or whether the
dynamics favor a second mover that can learn from and improve on the first mover. In
a wide-ranging review of cases and literature, Suarez and Lanzolla (2005) found that the
possibility of building a durable first mover advantage depends on the speed with which
the technology and the market are evolving. Their analysis suggests it is more difficult to
develop a sustainable advantage when both are developing quickly, as they are in the
digital currency space.
In the payments case, looking at the United States and China provides an important
example of a second mover advantage. For example, the United States was a first mover
in digital wallets, as both Google Wallet and Apple Pay came out years before Alipay’s
digital wallet app launched. Yet, Alipay gained a second mover advantage by learning
from its predecessors’ difficulties coordinating parties involved in NFC payments, focus­
ing on QR codes instead that did not require to buy in from telecom companies that
control sim cards, nor phone manufacturers that control NFC capabilities in handsets
(Chorzempa 2018).
The most important way in which a first mover advantage in CBDCs may manifest
itself is through currency competition, in which the digital RMB could facilitates inter­
nationalization of the Yuan at the Dollar’s expense. PBOC officials have suggested that
the digital RMB will help improve internationalization (Fan 2018), but few details have
been released to date about how the digital RMB as currently designed would remove the
barriers that have kept the RMB to a limited international role. Currently, it is only the
sixth most used currency, totaling 1.66% of global payments value (Society for
Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT) 2020).
Huang, Wang, and Fan (2014) found three critical factors needed for an international
currency: economic weight, openness and depth of financial markets, and the credibility
of economic and legal systems. While China certainly has sufficient economic weight to
have a global reserve currency, it is not clear to what extent the DC/EP project can affect
the other two. They are in fact not as much technological than related both to the strong
existing network effects around the US Dollar as well as China’s institutions and policy
choices.
When it comes to the openness and depth of financial markets, despite significant
moves to open up its financial markets to foreign investors, China has prioritized
domestic financial stability and capital controls over capital account liberalization since
2015. In doing so, policymakers have chosen not to make the RMB more freely usable
abroad, even though this policy choice meant a slowdown and even temporarily
a reversal in RMB internationalization. So far, there is no sign that the PBOC will
relax these capital controls for the digital RMB, though that could change. It seems
likely that it will allow foreign visitors, including those to the Winter Olympics in
Beijing in 2022, to use the digital RMB, but allowing them (and Chinese tourists) to
continue to use their digital wallets outside China and transact peer-to-peer among
foreigners would be a much greater step to liberalization, requiring much more careful
consideration of the implications for money laundering and other risks of allowing
overseas use of currency.

112

M. CHORZEMPA

Another reason to be skeptical that the DC/EP project will drive RMB internationa­
lization in the near term, even if it predates a Fed CBDC by years, is that it is a retailfacing CBDC, whereas the projects other central banks have used to explore cross-border
use of CBDCs have involved wholesale CBDCs that function more as back end infra­
structure for the large-scale money flows between institutions that dominate global
payments. While some have argued that China could encourage countries that receive
investment as part of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) to use the digital RMB, it is not
clear whether such countries will prefer digital RMB to either regular RMB or US Dollars
that can be more widely and easily used. If the PBOC’s design for DC/EP involves the
PBOC having the capability to see every transaction that occurs with the currency, then
other countries are even less likely to be willing to have their citizens or companies use
the digital RMB out of concerns about surveillance.
A related reason for skepticism involves network effects. China may gain significant
‘soft power’ by being the first major economy to launch a CBDC, which may manifest
itself in design choices by other central banks to make their CBDCs interoperable with
the digital RMB. Nevertheless, in the short term, it may be in fact more difficult to
internationalize a digital RMB than a regular RMB because there is no existing CBDC
payment network to plug into. In comparison with the well-established tools used to
trade currencies today, the digital currency space lacks the deep liquidity and easily
available hedging tools critical for broad international adoption.
Chinese authorities will face an interesting dilemma, because any advantage in knowl­
edge about CBDCs from its pioneering efforts will depend on how the PBOC commu­
nicates and disseminates knowledge among the international community about its
project. Desire to keep a ‘lead’ may result in sharing little about how the system works,
keeping it a state secret, but the soft power advantages and potential interoperability
would require them to share their lessons more openly. The Fed has already committed
that ‘any codebase that is developed through [the experiment with MIT] will be offered as
open-source software for anyone to use for experimentation’ (Brainard 2020b).
When it comes to Huang and co-authors’ last factor for global currency status, that of
the strength and international trust in a country’s economic, political, and legal institu­
tions, there remains a gap that the digital RMB is not likely to change anytime soon. Fed
Chair Powell’s recent remarks at the IMF (Powell 2020) clearly had a contrast with China
in mind when he said that the US dollar’s global leadership role is based on, ‘reliable rule
of law, strong and transparent institutions, deep financial markets, and an open capital
account . . . which reach far beyond the merely technological.’

Conclusion
Until many more pilot programs start and others advance into widespread release, both
the benefits and risks of retail CBDC will remain unproven. Until then, it is not clear
whether the current spike in interest in CBDCs around the world will lead most central
banks to issue them, or whether such efforts will be eventually judged a success.
China has moved much more aggressively to commit early and develop a CBDC than
the United States, though this analysis shows that the latter has, like many other
countries, significantly revised its stance on CBDCs towards a more positive sentiment
in the past few years. Emerging markets like China are more likely to perceive benefits

CHINA ECONOMIC JOURNAL

113

worth the risk of CBDC issuance, while high-income economies like the US are taking
a more gradual approach that minimizes potential disruption.
The US strategy seems to be relying on a course of action that allows the Fed to be at or
close to the frontier when it comes to new technologies in currency and payments, but
without committing to issuing a CBDC. One drawback of this strategy, however, is that
the Fed will not be able to gain some of the practical ‘learning by doing’ knowledge that
the PBOC is gaining from its retail pilot programs and eventual implementation of DC/
EP, including regulation of the intermediary layer between the central bank and users.
The Federal Reserve most likely has concluded that the risk of piloting or issuing
a CBDC in a few years will be significantly lower due to the ability to learn from
accumulated experience in other countries. Only then will experts and the general public
know to what extent CBDCs will advance financial inclusion, how to include security
features that can handle the risk of cyber threats, whether disintermediation or a flight
out of banks in financial crises can be prevented, the cost trade-offs, and other
considerations.
This course of action does entail the risk that the PBOC will gain a first mover
advantage, but the analysis here suggests that the pace of technology and market devel­
opment will make any first mover advantage difficult to sustain in the short term, due to
the absence of an ecosystem that would facilitate rapid development of network effects.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

References
Auer, R., G. Cornelli, and J. Frost. 2020. “Rise of the Central Bank Digital Currencies: Drivers,
Approaches and Technologies.” BIS Working Papers, No. 880 https://www.bis.org/publ/
work880.htm
Badev, and Chen. 2014. https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2014/files/2014104pap.
pdf
Boar, C., H. Holden, and A. Wadsworth, 2020, “Impending Arrival: A Sequel to the Survey on
Central Banking Digital Currency.” BIS working paper No. 107 https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/
bispap107.pdf
Brainard, L. 2016a. “The Use of Distributed Ledger Technologies in Payment, Clearing, and
Settlement.” Speech at the Institute of International Finance Blockchain Roundtable, April 14
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20160414a.htm
Brainard, L. 2016b. “Distributed Ledger Technology: Implications for Payments, Clearing, and
Settlement.” Speech at the Institute of International Finance Annual Meeting Panel on
Blockchain. Accessed 7 October 2016 https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brai
nard20161007a.htm
Brainard, L. 2018. “Cryptocurrencies, Digital Currencies, and Distributed Ledger Technologies:
What are We Learning?” Speech at Decoding Digital Currency Conference, May 15 https://www.
federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/brainard20180515a.pdf
Brainard, L. 2019. “Digital Currencies, Stablecoins, and the Evolving Payments Landscape.” Speech
at The Future of Money in the Digital Age Conference, October 16 https://www.federalreserve.
gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20191016a.htm

114

M. CHORZEMPA

Brainard, L. 2020a. “The Digitalization of Payments and Currency: Some Issues for
Consideration.” Speech at the Symposium on the Future of Payments. Accessed 5 February
2020 https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20200205a.htm
Brainard, L. 2020b. “An Update on Digital Currencies”, Speech at the Federal Reserve Board and
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco’s Innovation Office Hours, San Francisco, CA. Accessed 13
August 2020 https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20200813a.htm
Chorzempa, M. 2018. “How China Leaped Ahead in the Fintech Race.” https://www.piie.com/
blogs/china-economic-watch/how-china-leapfrogged-ahead-united-states-fintech-race
Christopher, G. J., and D. Gorfine. 2019. “We Sent a Man to the Moon. We Can Send the Dollar to
Cyberspace.” https://www.wsj.com/articles/we-sent-a-man-to-the-moon-we-can-send-thedollar-to-cyberspace-11571179923?mod=article_inline
Fan, Y. 2018. “Yicai Interview: Some Thoughts on Central Bank Digital Currencies.”https://www.
yicai.com/news/5395409.html
Hill, F., and B. Foster. 2019. “Letter to Chairman Jerome Powell.” September 30. https://www.
coindesk.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/Foster-Hill-US-Crypto.pdf
Huang, Y., D. Wang, and G. Fan. 2014. “Paths to a Reserve Currency: Internationalization of the
Renminbi and Its Implications.” ADBI Working Paper 482 https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2441821
Kiff, J., J. Alwzair, S. Davidovic, A. Farias, A. Khan, T. Khiaonarong, M. Malaika, H. Monroe, N.
Sugimoto, H. Tourpe, and P. Zhou. 2020. “A Survey of Research on Retail Central Bank Digital
Currency”, IMF Working Paper 20/104 https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2020/
06/26/A-Survey-of-Research-on-Retail-Central-Bank-Digital-Currency-49517
Koning, J. P. 2014. “Fedcoin.” Moneyness Blog http://jpkoning.blogspot.com/2014/10/fedcoin.html
Mills, D., K. Wang, B. Malone, A. Ravi, J. Marquardt, C. Chen, A. Badev, et al. 2016. “Distributed
Ledger Technology in Payments, Clearing, and Settlement.” In Finance and Economics
Discussion Series 2016-095, Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
doi:10.17016/FEDS.2016.095.
Mnuchin, S. 2019. “Remarks at House Financial Services Committee Hearing on Promoting
Financial Stability? Reviewing the Administration’s Deregulatory Approach to Financial
Stability.” December 5 https://financialservices.house.gov/calendar/eventsingle.aspx?EventID=
404856
Mu, C. 2019. “Speech at the Third Annual China Finance 40 Forum’s Yichun Forum.” Accessed
10August 2019.
People’s Bank of China. 2016. “中国人民银行数字货币研讨会在京召开.” http://www.pbc.gov.
cn/goutongjiaoliu/113456/113469/3008070/index.html
People’s Bank of China. 2020. “中国人民银行关于《中华人民共和国中国人民银行法 (修订草
案征求意见稿) 》公开征求意见的通知”, Accessed 23 October 2020 http://www.pbc.gov.cn/
goutongjiaoliu/113456/113469/4115077/index.html
Powell, J. 2017. “Innovation, Technology, and the Payments System, Speech at Blockchain: The
Future of Finance and Capital Markets?” The Yale Law School Center for the Study of Corporate
Law, March 3 https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20170303a.htm
Powell, J. 2019a. “Press Conference.” June 19 https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/
FOMCpresconf20190619.pdf
Powell, J. 2019b. “Response to Congressman French Hill.” November 19.
Powell, J. 2020. “Remarks at the 2020 IMF Fall Meetings.” https://www.cnbc.com/2020/10/19/
watch-fed-chair-jerome-powell-speak-live-to-the-international-monetary-fund.html
Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT). November 2020. “RMB
Tracker.” https://www.swift.com/our-solutions/compliance-and-shared-services/businessintelligence/renminbi/rmb-tracker/rmb-tracker-document-centre
Suarez, F. F., and G. Lanzolla. 2005. “The Half-Truth of First Mover Advantage.” https://hbr.org/
2005/04/the-half-truth-of-first-mover-advantage
Velde. 2013. https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/chicago-fed-letter/2013/december-317
Wang, X. 2019. “Speech at Peking University’s Institute of Digital Finance.” July 8.

CHINA ECONOMIC JOURNAL

115

Xiaochuan, Z. 2013. “Interview with Caijing Media.” http://misc.caijing.com.cn/chargeFullNews.
jsp?id=113695309&time=2013-12-16=106
Yellen, J. 2017. “Press Conference.” December 13 https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/
files/fomcpresconf20171213.pdf
Yi, G. 2020a. “Interview with Caixin Media.” Accessed 26 May 2020 http://finance.caixin.com/
2020-05-26/101558921.html
Yi, G. 2020b. “Speech at Hong Kong Fintech Week.” November 2

