Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43615-022-00170-0

    SHORT COMMUNICATION



Circular Economy and Central Bank Digital Currency

Peterson K. Ozili1

Received: 21 November 2021 / Accepted: 29 March 2022 / Published online: 7 April 2022
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022


Abstract
The emergence of central bank digital currency (CBDC) provides an opportunity for cen-
tral banks to make an important contribution to the transition to a circular economy. This
paper examines the role of a central bank digital currency in the circular economy. Central
banks can contribute to the transition to a circular economy in two ways: first, by making
central bank digital currency accessible to circular businesses and other players in the cir-
cular economy sector, and second, by looking into how the design features of CBDC can
support circular economy goals. On the role of CBDC in the circular economy, I argue
that a central bank digital currency offers a better payment option for circular economy
financial transactions; central bank digital currency can lead to greater financial inclusion
for ‘unbanked’ informal workers in the circular economy; CBDC can create a gateway that
allows a central bank to offer financial assistance to distressed circular businesses; using a
central bank digital currency can reduce illicit activities in the circular economy; a central
bank digital currency can be used to provide stimulus funding to support circular busi-
nesses during crises; and, a central bank digital currency can offer low transaction cost for
circular economy financial transactions. The paper also shows the link between CBDC and
the circular economy. It also offers a critical perspective on the link between CBDC and
the circular economy.

Keywords Circular economy · Central bank digital currency · Circular finance · Linear
economy · Resources · Sustainability · Central bank · CBDC design · Blockchain ·
Sustainable development · Payment system · Innovation


Introduction

The circular economy is part of global efforts to achieve the sustainable development goals
of the United Nations. The circular economy aims to preserve and maximize the value of
materials until materials reach the end of its life [1]. In other words, the circular economy
ensures that the value of materials is preserved for a long time. Corporations, such as the
Ellen MacAuthur Foundation, the FinanCE Working Group, ING, and RaboBank, have
been at the forefront of the transition from a linear economy to a circular economy.


* Peterson K. Ozili
  petersonkitakogelu@yahoo.com
1
      Central Bank of Nigeria, Abuja, Nigeria


                                                                                                13
                                                                                        Vol.:(0123456789)
1502                                           Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516


    A central bank digital currency is the digital representation of paper money and is
a direct liability of the issuing central bank. Central bank digital currency, apart from
being a money equivalent, can be designed to be used as a payment solution for most
types of transactions. A central bank digital currency has many potential benefits,
including the potential to offer low transaction cost than that charged by financial insti-
tutions; it can increase cross-border remittances and increase financial inclusion [2].
Given the enormous opportunity that central bank digital currency presents for busi-
nesses and projects in the circular economy, there is need for a discussion on how cir-
cular businesses can benefit from a central bank digital currency. Also, as central bank
digital currency and circular economy concepts are growing in popularity among practi-
tioners and policymakers, there is a need to examine the link between the two concepts.
    Although the transition to a circular economy is expected to generate some environ-
mental, economic, and social benefits [3], the transition to a circular economy cannot
be fully achieved without substantial funding for circular businesses and circular pro-
jects [4]. And even when funding is fully available for circular economy projects and
business activities, there is a need to develop innovative payment solutions that enables
efficient allocation of funding to circular projects and activities. The current model of
financing that puts banks and financial institutions at the epicenter of financial inter-
mediation presents some challenges. The most significant of the challenges is the high
transaction cost involved in investing and lending to circular businesses. An innovative
solution that has emerged to reduce transaction cost for circular businesses is the central
bank digital currency.
    Previous studies have looked at how payment solutions can facilitate activities in
various sectors of the circular economy. For instance, Kouhizadeh et al. [5] focused on
blockchain payment and argue that automatic agreements stored on the blockchain can
be initiated using blockchain payment that help to reduce cost, reduce time and minimize
communication problems in supply chains in the circular economy. Kouhizadeh and Sarkis
[6] show that blockchain-based smart contracts have a variety of applications in circular
economy practices, for instance, it allows suppliers to pay for returned products through
blockchain payment rather than allowing the buyer to dispose the product as waste when
the buyer no longer need the purchased product. Pizzi et al. [7] focused on Fintech pay-
ment and show that Fintech enterprises can provide customizable payment solutions that
are suitable for circular business models. Other related studies include Upadhyay et al. [8],
Böckel et al. [9], Blakstad and Allen [10], etc. Despite these existing studies, the litera-
ture has not addressed how specific payment alternatives, such as a central bank digital
currency (CBDC), can facilitate activities in the circular economy. The lack of previous
studies in this area makes it difficult to gain a rigorous understanding of how CBDCs can
facilitate growth in the circular economy, and how circular economy activities can rein-
force the need for CBDCs. This paper addresses this issue by establishing a link between
the circular economy and central bank digital currency. Establishing a link between the
circular economy and CBDC is important because it can offer insights on how retail or
wholesale CBDCs can be designed, and redesign, to support circular economy goals in the
circular economy.
    To date, the circular economy literature has not explored how innovative payment solu-
tions, such as a central bank digital currency, can promote activities in the circular econ-
omy. This paper is the first to explore the potential role of a central bank digital currency in
accelerating the transition to a circular economy. There is also a need to create a common
understanding of the role of central bank digital currency in circular finance. Such under-
standing can stir up helpful debates in the literature and can open up new opportunities for

13
Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516                                     1503


small businesses, large corporations, and individuals that want access to finance to carry
out circular economy activities.
    The discussion in this paper contributes to the literature in the following ways. Firstly,
the study contributes to the circular economy literature. Some studies in this literature
include Andrews [11], Kouhizadeh et al. [5], Geissdoerfer et al. [3], Schöggl et al. [12],
etc. The present study contributes to the circular economy literature by showing that the
presence of an effective payment alternative, such as a central bank digital currency, is
crucial to support and accelerate the transition to a circular economy. Secondly, this study
contributes to the literature that examine circular finance. Some studies in this literature
include Dewick et al. [13], Aranda-Usón et al. [14], Ozili [15], etc. The present study con-
tributes to the circular finance literature by showing that a central bank digital currency can
act as a reliable low-cost payment solution to facilitate circular economy financial trans-
actions. Thirdly, the discussion in the paper opens up new discussions about the role of
central banks in the transition to a circular economy. Such discussions can offer ideas on
how central banks can design, and redesign, the CBDC in ways that promote sustainable
financing for circular economy projects and activities which are geared towards sustainable
development.
    Regarding methodology, I used desk research method to analyse available informa-
tion that link central bank digital currency with the circular economy. The desk research
method involves collecting and examining information that already exists in publicly avail-
able policy documents, practitioner white papers, media reports, academic journals, and
use-case reports. The information obtained from these sources were used to establish a link
between central bank digital currency and the circular economy.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The paper begins by presenting a con-
ceptual background of the circular economy, circular finance, and central bank digital cur-
rency in the “Conceptual Background” section. The paper then reviews studies on the link
between innovative finance and the circular economy in the “Literature Review” section.
Thereafter, the paper discusses the role of CBDC in the circular economy in the “Role of
CBDC in the Circular Economy” section. The paper then shows the direct link between
CBDC and the circular economy in the “Direct Link Between Circular Economy and
CBDC” section. Afterwards, the paper presents some critical perspective on the use and
application of CBDC in the circular economy in the “Critical Perspective on CBDC for the
Circular Economy” section. Finally, the paper highlights the contribution of the study to
existing knowledge in the “Contribution to Existing Knowledge” section.



Conceptual Background

Circular Economy

A circular economy is an economic system, or economic philosophy, that preserves the
value of resources and raw materials by minimizing raw materials or resources waste and
promoting the reuse and recycling of resources and raw materials [16, 17],and [15]. 3,
p.7) define the circular economy as “a regenerative system in which resource input, waste,
emission, and energy leakage are minimised by slowing, closing, and narrowing material
and energy loops.”
   The circular economy is based on three principles, which are (i) eliminating waste and
pollution, (ii) recycling products and materials at their highest value, and (iii) regenerating

                                                                                   13
1504                                                              Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516


nature [18]. A circular economy decouples economic activity from the depletion of finite
resources towards the preservation and regeneration of finite resources [19], thereby gener-
ating positive benefits for business, people, and the environment [18].
    The circular economy needs to be distinguished from the linear economy. The linear
economy operates a take–make–dispose model that degrades resources and generates unac-
ceptable levels of waste [20]. In the linear economy, raw materials are sourced, and then
transformed into final products for use by consumers until they are finally discarded as
waste and then destroyed [21]. In the linear economy, value is created by producing and
selling as many products as possible [22]. In contrast, the circular economy operates a
reduce–reuse–recycle model that preserve resources, thereby protecting the environment
[23]. In the circular economy, the value of resources and raw materials are preserved by
minimizing raw materials or resources waste, and promoting the reuse and recycling of
resources and raw materials [24].
    The circular economy plays a significant role in the climate change mitigation agenda.
It contributes to mitigating resource scarcity, resource waste, and pollution, which together
helps to preserve the environment and contribute to the climate change mitigation agenda.

Circular Finance

Finance is needed to accelerate the transition to a circular economy. Financial institutions
need to allocate more capital to stimulate economic growth through the transition from a
linear economy to a circular economy [25]. One way in which financial institutions can do
this is by creating financial instruments that can be used to raise capital to fund circular
economy projects and activities. Common terms used to describe financial instruments that
are design for circular economy purposes are “circular financing” or “circular economy
finance” (see, for example, [13, 26]. Circular finance, or circular economy finance, refers to
financial instruments where the funding raised (e.g., investments, loans, or donations) will
be exclusively used to finance or re-finance, in part or in full, new and/or existing eligible
companies or projects in the circular economy [27]. Circular finance can also be viewed
as any form of financial service or financial instrument that integrates circular economy
factors into business and investment decisions in order to accelerate the transition to a cir-
cular economy as a basic cornerstone of sustainable development [28].1 These definitions
show that circular finance uses financial instruments to accelerate the transition to a circu-
lar economy.
    There is need for innovative circular economy financial instruments that are structured to
reduce investment risk and increase risk-adjusted returns. These innovative financial instru-
ments also need to be ring-fenced to ensure that the financial instruments are used only to
finance specific circular economy projects and activities [27]. If the financial instruments
are not ring-fenced, it means the financial instruments can be used to finance both circular
and linear projects and activities [27]. Types of financing instruments that can be used to
fund circular economy projects and activities include: own capital (e.g., personal savings
of the entrepreneur and contributions received family members and friends,subsidies and
grants; venture capital (e.g., capital provided by angel investors; crowdfunding (e.g., funds
contributed or donated by generous members of the public who support circular economy
goals; and bank funding (e.g., loans provided by banks [29]. Investors, banks, and financial



1
    https://​www.​pwc.​ch/​en/​insig​hts/​susta​inabi​lity/​circu​lar-​finan​ce.​html


13
Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516                                      1505


regulators can play a significant role in accelerating the transition to a circular economy by
ensuring that there are abundant financing instruments to meet the financing needs of the
circular economy.



CBDC

CBDC is a digital representation of paper money or physical money [2, 30]. The origin
of CBDC dates back to the 1980s when central banks permitted commercial banks to use
digital money, and this led to a rise in digital money [31]. Digital money at that time was
depositors’ account balances that are accessible using bank applications, mobile wallets, or
Internet banking applications which today is known as mobile banking or Internet bank-
ing [31]. Two decades later, cryptocurrencies, also known as private digital currencies,
emerged, which allows people to hold large amounts of private digital currencies without
needing an intermediary and without regulation. Examples of cryptocurrencies include Bit-
coin, Ethereum, Dogecoin, Tether, etc. (Náñez Alonso et al., 2021). Central banks observed
that cryptocurrencies were becoming very popular and that a large number of people had
embraced private digital currencies. It also led to concerns that people could abandon fiat
paper money in favor of cryptocurrencies. This led central banks to look into the possibility
of creating their own digital currencies, and to determine whether there is a strong case for
creating a central bank digital currency [32]. As of 2021, six countries have fully launched
a digital currency. They are the Bahamas, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Antigua and Barbuda,
Saint Lucia, Nigeria, Grenada, Dominica, and Montserrat. Other countries have formally
declared that they are conducting research into CBDC or plan to adopt a CBDC in the near
future. These countries include Thailand, Ghana, the USA, India, the UK, etc.
    CBDC has specific features. The first and most important feature of a CBDC is that
it is a fiat digital currency or a digital legal tender [33]. This means that the central bank
digital currency is recognized by law. A CBDC is issued only by the central bank and is a
liability of the central bank [34]. This means that the central bank is fully liable for any loss
of CBDC arising from data breaches, privacy breaches and theft. A CBDC is designed to
perform all the functions of paper money and can perform additional functions [35]. This
means that the CBDC can be used as a medium of exchange, a store of value, a unit of
account, and for settlement of debt. CBDC can be used by individuals, firms and govern-
ments to make micro and large payments [2]. A CBDC is also designed to offer settlement
finality for all transactions [36]. This means that a transfer of funds using CBDC is final,
irrevocable, and unconditional.
    Here’s how CBDCs work. A central bank can issue CBDC directly to the digital wal-
let of citizens [34], which is similar to how a government make stimulus payment directly
into bank account of citizens. In this case, the central bank will credit the account of the
receiver with specified units of CBDC in exchange for the paper money equivalent held
in the receiver’s bank account. The central bank can also issue CBDC to financial institu-
tions for distribution. In this case, a person who has money in his or her bank account will
notify the bank that he or she wants to convert a specified amount of deposit balances into
CBDC units. This amount is then transferred to the CBDC account of the person. After
conversion, the deposit balances in the CBDC account can then be used to make electronic
payment. The person initiates an electronic payment transaction and selects the amount to
be paid. The person approves the electronic payment by scanning his or her transaction QR
code against the QR code of the seller (in the case of an account-based CBDC held in a


                                                                                     13
1506                                          Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516


digital wallet), or by validating the token of the seller before making payment (in the case
of a token-based CBDC). Once this is done, value is transferred electronically.
    While the design of a CBDC may vary across countries, one feature that is common to
all CBDC is that a CBDC is usually designed to fit with the current payment system infra-
structure. This ensures that CBDCs will work like a mobile wallet which most people are
already familiar with.



Literature Review

CBDC Literature

Central bank digital currency is a recent innovation and is becoming a hot topic in main-
stream public discourse and in the academic literature. Calle and Eidan [36] show that the
reason for issuing and using a central bank digital currency will differ widely depending on
the particular central bank and the existing payment systems in each country. They show
that central banks’ motivation for issuing a retail CBDC is to increase seigniorage income,
support monetary policy, link payments to identity, enable participation in a tokenized
financial ecosystem, foster competition within the private sector, provide a cash alterna-
tive, or to generally modernize the payment system. Ozili [37] shows that another reason
why central banks issue a central bank digital currency is to promote financial inclusion
by digitizing value chains, offering low transaction cost, and being able to have CBDC
holdings without needing a bank account. Ponce [38] shows that a central bank digital cur-
rency serves as an alternative tool to help central banks improve efficiency, resilience, and
security in retail payments and to preserve financial stability. Huynh et al. [39] suggest
that CBDC should be an easy-to-use, low-cost, and secure payment method to ensure full
consumer adoption and merchant acceptance. Khiaonarong and Humphrey [40] argue that
the level and trend in cash use in a country will influence the demand for central bank
digital currency, and the demand for digital currency may be low in countries where there
is high preference for cash substitutes such as cards, electronic money, and mobile phone
payments.
   Several studies have called for caution when using CBDCs. For example, Mancini-Grif-
foli et al. [33] show that the impact of CBDC will depend on its design. They suggest that
central banks need to consider their specific country circumstances when designing and
adopting CBDC while paying careful attention to the risks of CBDC. Barontini and Holden
[32] argue that central banks will move at different speeds in adopting a CBDC due to dif-
ferences in technical capabilities, and central banks should apply a great deal of caution in
adopting a CBDC. They further suggest that a central bank should collaborate with other
central banks to develop a robust and effective CBDC. Williamson [41] argues that CBDC
tends to encourage banking panics, even though banking panics are less disruptive with
central bank digital currency than with physical currency. Ozili [2] shows that there is a
need to (i) determine the optimal CBDC design that meets all competing objectives, (ii)
determine the effect of CBDC on the cost of credit, (iii) the effect of CBDC on financial
stability, and (iv) find a balance between limiting the CBDC holdings of users and allowing
users to hold unlimited units of CBDC. Arner et al. [42] suggest that most central banks
should focus on transforming their existing payment systems rather than on rolling out a
central bank digital currency. Davoodalhosseini [43] shows that having both cash and a
CBDC available to people at the same time may result in lower welfare than in the cases

13
Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516                                     1507


where only cash or only a CBDC is available. They suggest that it is better to have only one
available option at a time either cash or CBDC.


Circular Economy Literature

Several studies identify some benefits and challenges of a circular economy. Stahel [44]
suggests that the circular economy can reduce resource waste by encouraging the re-use
and recycling of materials to save resources, energy, and create local jobs. Brydges [45]
shows that the circular economy will lead to a more efficient, closed-loop economy. Sal-
menperä et al. [46] investigate the application of the circular economy in the waste man-
agement industry. They show that a circular economy approach to waste management will
promote the retention of material value through waste recycling, better sharing of waste-
related data, greater dialogue and cooperation between key players, and harmonization of
regulations and their interpretations. Chen et al. [47] examine the application of circular
economy in the textiles industry. They were concerned about the rate at which textile waste
end up in landfills. They suggest ways in which circular economy can change this trend
such as by creating renewable raw materials sources, rethinking production, maximizing
the use and reuse of textile products, adopting reproduction and recycling strategies, redis-
tributing textiles to new and parallel markets, and improvising means to extend the textiles
lifetime. Geng et al. [48] suggest ways in which policymakers can globalize the circular
economy. Some of the suggested ideas include (i) setting up a global database that capture
the link between resource use and resource waste, (ii) fostering knowledge sharing about
the circular economy, (iii) encouraging international collaboration to promote large-scale
experimentation of a circular economy model, (iv) developing standards for performance
measurement, reporting and accounting in the circular economy, and (v) formulating and
enforcing regulation of the circular economy on a global scale. Notwithstanding, Chhim-
wal et al. [49], Pincelli et al. [50], and Droege et al. [51] identify some challenges in imple-
menting a circular economy model. The challenges include non-compliance with environ-
mental laws, revenue generation problems, difficulty in attracting investors, technological
limitations, lack of policy support, the high cost involved in the circular economy transi-
tion, and low demand for refurbished and reused products.


Literature on the Relationship Between Circular Economy and Financing Options

A number of studies explore the financing options that are available for growing the circu-
lar economy. For instance, Dewick et al. [13] suggest that a major shift in private and pub-
lic investment is needed to forge a transition to a circular economy. Sepetis [52] calls for
collaboration between the public and private sector for change towards sustainable finance
and a shift towards circular business models. Sepetis also suggests that environmental,
social, and governance (ESG) risk should be incorporated into circular economy financing
models. Meanwhile, Hassan et al. [53] suggest that non-interest financial instruments can
offer sufficient funding for the transition from the linear economy to the circular economy.
    Empirical studies such as Demirel and Danisman [54] examine the impact of availa-
ble external funding for circular economy activities on the growth of European small and
medium scale enterprises (SMEs). They find that equity finance, particularly venture capi-
tal investments, contribute positively to the growth of European SMEs. Aranda-Usón et al.
[14], in an analysis of Spanish companies, find that the availability of funds, the quality of

                                                                                    13
1508                                                       Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516


firms’ financial resources, and the availability of public subsidies have a positive effect in
stimulating the implementation of circular economy initiatives.
   Other studies explore the role of banks and other financial institutions in the circu-
lar economy. For instance, Goovaerts and Verbeek [55] suggest that financial institu-
tions can contribute to the circular economy transition in two ways: first, by providing
appropriate financial and legal advice,and second, by looking at their own business
models and risk assessment frameworks to better balance linear and circular risks.
Ozili and Opene [4] identify the role of banks in the circular economy. They suggest
that banks should: develop a common understanding of the circular economy,issue
widely accepted and recognized guidelines on circular economy finance; adapt exist-
ing finance models to fit into a circular economy model; offer credit lines to circular
businesses; create a green bank; train bank staff; promote a strong culture of waste
reduction and material re-use; ensure that the board risk committee is competent in
circular risk management and control. Also, Ozili [15] shows that the circular econ-
omy offers some benefits to banks such as greater loan diversification opportunities,
increased lending to circular clients in the recycling sector, and promoting responsi-
ble and sustainable banking. Some benefits to non-bank financial institutions include
greater sustainability-adjusted return on investment for investment companies, greater
funding to microfinance institutions; and more opportunities for collaborative funding
to circular businesses [15].


Role of CBDC in the Circular Economy

CBDC Offers a Better Payment Option for Investing in the Circular Economy

Circular investors can pay for their investment using CBDC. Payments made using
CBDC are low-cost, fast, flexible, safe, and secure [56]. They also provide a level of
convenience that is not obtainable with credit cards, debit cards, or bank transfer pay-
ment alternatives [57]. Investors and donors will be able to use central bank digital
currency as a means of payment [58], and to transfer funds directly to circular busi-
nesses and projects, thereby bypassing financial institutions and the associated high
transaction cost. Recently, the assets in public equity funds dedicated to the circular
economy grew from US$300 million in 2019 to almost US$9.5 billion by November
2021.2 Using CBDC to accelerate circular investment can further increase the amount
of public equity funds invested in the circular economy by reducing investment fees
and transaction cost.

CBDC Can Increase Financial Inclusion for Circular Economy Workers

Many informal employees or local waste pickers working for circular businesses are
often paid in cash [59], either because they do not own a formal bank account or for
some other reasons. This situation is common in developing countries and in poor
countries, and it presents a major hindrance to financial inclusion for informal work-
ers working for circular businesses especially in developing and poor countries. A


2
    Ellen MacArthur Foundation https://​ellen​macar​thurf​ounda​tion.​org/​topics/​finan​ce/​overv​iew


13
Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516                                1509


central bank digital currency can change this trend by giving employers an option to
pay the wages of informal workers into their account-based CBDC wallet if informal
workers do not have a formal bank account. This means that informal workers can be
financially included in the formal financial system through owning a CBDC wallet
even though they do not have a formal bank account, thereby, increasing financial
inclusion [37]. For example, employers in the circular economy can pay the wages
of informal workers into their CBDC wallets if informal workers are having difficul-
ties in meeting the burdensome documentation required to open a formal account in a
bank.

CBDC Creates a Gateway that Allow a Central Bank to Offer Financial Assistance
to Distressed Circular Businesses

CBDC can be used as a means to make welfare and stimulus payments to distressed
firms [60]. Using central bank digital currency to facilitate circular economy trans-
actions can establish a direct connection between circular economy players and the
central bank. The advantage is that it makes it easier for the central bank to give loans
directly to circular economy businesses, thereby eliminating third-party risks. Also,
the direct connection created between the central bank and circular businesses, when
the latter use CBDC can provide an opportunity for distressed circular businesses
to approach the central bank for financial assistance (e.g., a distress relief loan),
thereby allowing circular businesses to avoid the high interest rate they will incur if
they sought financial assistance from traditional lending institutions. Although cen-
tral bank’s loan support and financial assistance to circular businesses may appear
to be a less compelling case for why CBDC is important to circular businesses, it
is important to understand that circular businesses operating in a high interest rate
environment may experience difficulty in obtaining low-interest loan for traditional
financial institutions, and this could affect their survival in the short term. Such cir-
cular businesses may have no choice but to approach the central bank for financial
assistance since most central banks are allowed to lend to non-banks under exigent
circumstances. The central bank will find it easier to transfer CBDC-based digital
loans to circular businesses than to issue loans in the form of cash to circular busi-
nesses. Notwithstanding, there is no guarantee that central banks will lend directly
to non-banks or offer financial assistance to circular businesses just because circular
businesses use CBDC in their business activities.

Reducing Illicit Activity in the Circular Economy

Cash is a very appealing instrument for money laundering, tax evasion, payment
fraud, illegal diversion of funds, and other criminal activities [61]. Such risks can be
avoided or reduced when circular economy financial transactions are made using cen-
tral bank digital currency rather than cash. The advantage of central bank digital cur-
rency is that a central bank digital currency is deployed on a permissioned distributed
ledger technology or blockchain [62], and all transactions can be traced to the unique
ID of the sender and recipient of funds [63, 64]. Therefore, using a central bank digi-
tal currency can make it very difficult to carryout illicit activity in the circular econ-
omy. This can help to reduce criminal activities and other risks associated with cash-
based transactions in the circular economy. A real-life example that comes to mind

                                                                               13
1510                                                       Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516


is a criminal case reported in China in November 2021.3 A criminal (name withheld)
was arrested by Police in China for scamming over 300,000 yuan ($47,000) from a
victim (name withheld) using China’s central bank digital currency—the digital yuan.
The criminal allegedly called the victim, and impersonated police to obtain the vic-
tim’s personal information including the ID number, bank account details and a photo
of the victim’s face. The criminal then registered a digital yuan e-wallet for the victim
and transferred the money from the victim’s bank account, before transferring it again
to the criminal’s own e-wallet. The police traced the transaction and identified the
criminal as the owner of the receiving CBDC e-wallet. The criminal was arrested and
admitted to being involved in money laundering through the digital yuan. This real-
life example shows how easy it is to link CBDC transactions to the unique ID of the
sender and receiver, thereby making it easy to detect illicit activities using a CBDC.
This advantage of CBDC can be extended to the circular economy as CBDC can help
to detect financial fraud and reduce illicit criminal activity in the circular economy.

CBDC Can Help Circular Businesses Cope with Crises

Circular businesses may be affected by crises that lead to significant loss of revenue or
income [65]. Such crises can make it difficult for circular businesses to pay employee
wages and salaries. With CBDC, the government can intervene by providing stimulus
funding to support circular economy businesses. The government can do this by making
CBDC payments into the wallet-based account or token-based account of circular busi-
nesses to support circular economy businesses that are affected by the crisis. It can also
help businesses to cope with the negative effects of the crisis such as a pandemic, eco-
nomic recession, or financial crisis.

CBDC Can Offer Low Transaction Cost for Circular Economy Financial Transactions

CBDC can offer low transaction cost [33]. The benefit to circular businesses is that it
will become cheaper to receive circular economy donations, funding and investments
from generous donors and investors in other countries. The low transaction cost of
CBDC payments will make cross-border financial transactions cheaper [66]. A central
bank digital currency will also be beneficial to circular economy businesses that pay a
high transaction fee to move cash to different locations to pay informal workers their
wages. CBDC can reduce cost for merchants and consumers in the circular economy,
making it a cheaper alternative to bank notes, cheques, debit and credit cards, and
online transfers because the central bank may charge a very low transaction cost to
process CBDC payments. Reducing transaction cost is a strong argument for adopt-
ing CBDC. For example, a 2021 JPMorgan report4 shows that global corporations
pay $120 billion in transaction cost through intermediary networks each year. Using
CBDC to make payments can save global corporations an estimated £100 billion in
transaction cost. Also, during the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic in the United States,




3
  https://​www.​bloom​berg.​com/​news/​artic​les/​2021-​11-​17/​chine​se-​police-​makes-​arrest-​over-​digit​al-​yuan-​
scam
4
  https://​www.​jpmor​gan.​com/​news/​jpmor​gan-​centr​al-​bank-​digit​al-​curre​ncy-​report


13
Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516                                                 1511


there were arguments that circular economy entrepreneurs could have received their
paycheck protection program (PPP)5 check in the form of CBDC (digital dollar) pay-
ments if the US government had adopted a digital dollar at the time. This would have
reduced the cost incurred by the government in making PPP check payments to circu-
lar entrepreneurs and to everyone else.


Direct Link Between Circular Economy and CBDC

The direct link between CBDC and the circular economy depends on the CBDC design,
and the effect on circular economy transactions. Generally, a CBDC is usually designed
to meet specific goals such as payment efficiency, financial stability or financial inclusion
[2, 67, 68]. This means that the unique nature of a CBDC depends on the design of the
CBDC and the goal the central bank wants to achieve by adopting a CBDC. A CBDC
that is designed to support circular economy goals will have design features that encour-
age the use of CBDC for circular economy financial transactions. For example, a CBDC
can be designed to offer a transaction cost waiver for transactions that are channeled to
waste reduction activities or waste re-use activities. A CBDC can also be designed to have
features that give tax rebates for transactions that are channeled to waste reduction activi-
ties or waste re-use activities. A CBDC can also be designed to exempt circular economy
transactions from being taxed so as to encourage more circular businesses to use CBDC.
This type of specially-designed CBDC will offer huge incentives to circular businesses,
it can lead to cost savings, and can help to grow the circular economy industry. A CBDC
that is designed to promote circular economy goals will also have technical features that
restrict the use of CBDC for linear economy transactions. Such CBDC can be designed to
impose high taxes for linear economy transactions, thereby, inhibiting growth in the linear
economy. This means that a CBDC can be designed to have features that support circu-
lar economy goals while discouraging growth in the linear economy. In sum, a direct link
between CBDC and the circular economy can be established only if a CBDC is designed to
incorporate features that support circular economy goals while discouraging growth in the
linear economy. Figure 1 shows the direct link between CBDC and circular economy.



Critical Perspective on CBDC for the Circular Economy

Although a CBDC present new opportunities for growth in the circular economy [69],
there are potential impediments to using CBDC in the circular economy. The first impedi-
ment is that individual preference and choice will play a significant role in determining
whether CBDC will be fully embraced by circular workers, circular entrepreneurs, circular
investors, and circular corporations [39]. Individuals and businesses involved in circular
economy activities will have many payment options available to them, e.g., physical cash,
credit card, CBDC, cryptocurrency, debit card, etc. They will prefer one payment option


5
  The Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) is a $953-billion business loan program established by the
United States federal government in 2020 through the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act
(CARES Act). It was established to help certain businesses, self-employed workers, sole proprietors, certain
nonprofit organizations, and tribal businesses to continue paying their workers.


                                                                                               13
1512                                               Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516




Fig. 1  Direct link between circular economy and CBDC. Source: Constructed by author


over the other, and these preferences will reveal the extent to which individuals and busi-
nesses embrace CBDC in their circular economy activities. For instance, informal workers
may refuse to receive wages in the form of CBDC payment. Another example is that circu-
lar businesses may prefer to accept bank transfer payment rather than CBDC payment. The
implication is that if circular entrepreneurs, circular merchants, and circular corporations
do not fully embrace CBDC, the value of CBDC in the circular economy will decline.
Another potential impediment lies in the design of a CBDC. Central banks may not take
into account circular economy goals when designing a CBDC especially when they have
more important statutory priorities. Central banks tend to give more priority to price
stability and financial stability goals when designing a CBDC [67, 68], and may not be
interested in incorporating circular economy considerations in the CBDC design. Another
potential impediment is that economic agents in the circular economy may not understand
how a CBDC works, and as a result, they may prefer to continue using the existing payment
channels they are familiar with. Others may avoid CBDCs because they want their circular
economy transactions to be completely anonymous since the government actively monitors
CBDC transactions but cannot closely monitor cash transactions. Another potential imped-
iment is that there may be digital connectivity problems when using CBDC as a means of
payment for circular economy transactions [70]. This can limit the usefulness of CBDC
for circular economy transactions especially in developing and poor countries where high
cost of digital connectivity is a major problem. Another potential impediment is the lack
of awareness about CBDC. Circular entrepreneurs and businesses may not be aware about
the benefits of CBDC, and this can be attributed to poor publicity, poor awareness, and low
sensitization about the benefits of CBDC in promoting business activities in the circular
economy [71]. Another potential impediment is the cost of converting paper currency to
CBDC, and the cost of converting CBDC back to paper currency. The cost of converting
paper currency to CBDC and the cost of converting central bank digital currency back
to paper currency may be substantial to individuals and small businesses involved in cir-
cular economy activities, and this can discourage them from using CBDC. Finally, the
above mentioned impediments suggest that there is a need to proceed with caution in using


13
Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516                                    1513


CBDC to accelerate the transition to a circular economy. Central banks need to find a way
to ensure that CBDC design supports circular economy goals without sacrificing price sta-
bility, monetary stability, and financial stability goals of the central bank.



Contribution to Existing Knowledge

The discussions in this paper contribute to the literature that examine the role of finance
in accelerating the transition to a circular economy (see, for example, [13, 14, 72], etc.).
These studies show that the finance industry can provide financial resources to acceler-
ate the transition to a circular economy [13]. Ling-hua [72] shows that abundant financial
resources are needed to develop the circular economy, while other studies, such as Aranda-
Usón et al. [14], show that the availability of funds, the quality of a firm’s own financial
resources, and public subsidies can stimulate circular economy initiatives in the finance
industry. These three studies show that financial resources are needed to accelerate the
transition to a circular economy. The findings of the present study support the previous lit-
erature, and also extends the literature by showing how innovative payment channels, such
as a CBDC, can be used to channel financial resources to the circular economy such as the
recycling sector. Also, the findings of the present study extend the literature by showing
that CBDC can increase access to finance for circular economy activities, thereby acceler-
ating the transition to a circular economy. The findings of this paper also extend existing
knowledge by being the first study to examine how CBDC can accelerate the transition to a
circular economy.



Conclusion

This paper analyzed the role of a central bank digital currency in the circular economy. In
the paper, I argued that a central bank digital currency offers a better payment option for
circular economy transactions; central bank digital currency can increase financial inclu-
sion for unbanked informal workers in the circular economy; CBDC creates a gateway that
allows a central bank to offer financial assistance to distressed circular businesses; using a
central bank digital currency can help to reduce illicit activity in the circular economy; a
central bank digital currency can be used to provide stimulus funding to support circular
businesses during crises; and a central bank digital currency can offer low transaction cost
for circular economy financial transactions.
    The implication of the findings of this paper is that the current discussions about cir-
cular finance should also include discussions about the opportunities that a central bank
digital currency present for the circular economy as well as the benefits of using a central
bank digital currency to accelerate the transition to a circular economy. This can open up
an opportunity for policy makers, such as central banks, to support the circular economy
agenda. However, it is yet to be seen whether central banks will play a significant role in
supporting the transition to a circular economy other than offering its central bank digi-
tal currency as an alternative payment solution, and given their other statutory priorities.
Finally, a central bank digital currency is not the only existing innovative payment alterna-
tive that can support the circular economy transition. It is one of many payments alterna-
tive such as cryptocurrency, bitcoins, stable-coins, etc. As a result, there will be debates

                                                                                  13
1514                                                  Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516


about whether the circular economy should embrace CBDC or a better blockchain-based
alternative. Future studies can explore the role of other payment alternative in accelerating
the transition to a circular economy.

Author Contribution All contributions were made by the sole author.

Data availability Not applicable.

Code Availability Not applicable.

Declarations
Ethics Approval Not applicable.

Consent to Participate Not applicable.

Consent for Publication Not applicable.


Conflict of Interest The authors declare no competing interests.




References
 1. Blomsma F, & Tennant M (2020) Circular economy: preserving materials or products? Introducing the
    Resource States framework. Resour Conserv Recycl 156:104698
 2. Ozili PK (2022b) Central bank digital currency research around the World: a review of literature. J
    Money Laund Control.
 3. Geissdoerfer M, Savaget P, Bocken NM, Hultink EJ (2017) The Circular Economy–A new sustainabil-
    ity paradigm? J Clean Prod 143:757–768
 4. Ozili PK, & Opene F (2021) The role of banks in the circular economy. Available at SSRN.
 5. Kouhizadeh M, Zhu Q, Sarkis J (2020) Blockchain and the circular economy: potential tensions and
    critical reflections from practice. Prod Plan Control 31(11–12):950–966
 6. Kouhizadeh M, Sarkis J (2018) Blockchain practices, potentials, and perspectives in greening supply
    chains. Sustainability 10(10):3652
 7. Pizzi, S., Leopizzi, R., & Caputo, A. (2022). The enablers in the relationship between entrepreneurial
    ecosystems and the circular economy: the case of circularity.com. Manage Environ Qual: Int J 33(1),
    26–43
 8. Upadhyay A, Mukhuty S, Kumar V, & Kazancoglu Y (2021) Blockchain technology and the circular
    economy: implications for sustainability and social responsibility. J Clean Prod 293:126130
 9. Böckel A, Nuzum AK, Weissbrod I (2021) Blockchain for the circular economy: analysis of the
    research-practice gap. Sustain Prod Consum 25:525–539
10. Blakstad S, & Allen R (2018) Green Fintech. In FinTech Revolution (pp. 183–199). Palgrave Macmil-
    lan, Cham.
11. Andrews D (2015) The circular economy, design thinking and education for sustainability. Local Econ
    30(3):305–315
12. Schöggl JP, Stumpf L, & Baumgartner RJ (2020) The narrative of sustainability and circular economy-
    a longitudinal review of two decades of research. Resour Conserv Recycl 163:105073
13. Dewick P, Bengtsson M, Cohen MJ, Sarkis J, Schröder P (2020) Circular economy finance: Clear win-
    ner or risky proposition? J Ind Ecol 24(6):1192–1200
14. Aranda-Usón A, Portillo-Tarragona P, Marín-Vinuesa LM, Scarpellini S (2019) Financial resources for
    the circular economy: a perspective from businesses. Sustainability 11(3):1–23
15. Ozili PK (2021) Circular economy, banks, and other financial institutions: what’s in it for them? Circ
    Econ Sustain 1:787–798
16. Korhonen J, Honkasalo A, Seppälä J (2018) Circular economy: the concept and its limitations. Ecol
    Econ 143:37–46




13
Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516                                               1515


17. Pomponi F, Moncaster A (2017) Circular economy for the built environment: A research framework. J
    Clean Prod 143:710–718
18. MacArthur E (2017) Beyond plastic waste. Science 358(6365):843–843
19. Giampietro M, Funtowicz SO (2020) From elite folk science to the policy legend of the circular
    economy. Environ Sci Policy 109:64–72
20. Sariatli F (2017) Linear economy versus circular economy: a comparative and analyzer study for
    optimization of economy for sustainability. Visegrad Journal on Bioeconomy and Sustainable
    Development 6(1):31–34
21. Esposito M, Tse T, Soufani K (2018) Introducing a circular economy: new thinking with new man-
    agerial and policy implications. Calif Manage Rev 60(3):5–19
22. Gardetti MA (2019) Introduction and the concept of circular economy. In Circular economy in tex-
    tiles and apparel (pp. 1–11). Woodhead Publishing.
23. Kirchherr J, Reike D, Hekkert M (2017) Conceptualizing the circular economy: An analysis of 114
    definitions. Resour Conserv Recycl 127:221–232
24. Heshmati A (2017) A Review of the Circular Economy and its Implementation. Int J Green Econ
    11(3–4):251–288
25. UNEPFI (2020). Financing circularity: demystifying finance for circular economies. UN Environ-
    ment Programme Finance Initiative. Available at: https://​www.​unepfi.​org/​publi​catio​ns/​gener​al-​
    publi​catio​ns/​finan​cing-​circu​larity/
26. De La Cuesta-Gonzalez M, & Morales-García M (2021) Does finance as usual work for circular
    economy transition? A financiers and SMEs qualitative approach. J Environ Plan Manage 1–22.
27. CEFG (2018). Circular economy finance guidelines. Amsterdam. Available at: https://​circu​larec​
    onomy.​europa.​eu/​platf​orm/​en/​toolk​its-​guide​lines/​circu​lar-​econo​my-​finan​ce-​guide​lines
28. PWC (2021). Circular finance – the fulcrum of a circular economy. Research and Insight report.
29. Wyman O (2017) Supporting the circular economy transition – the role of the financial sector in
    The Netherlands. Amsterdam. Available at: https://​www.​olive​r wyman.​com/​conte​nt/​dam/​oliver-​
    wyman/​v2/​publi​catio​ns/​2017/​sep/​Circu​larEc​onomy_​web.​pdf
30. Bordo MD, & Levin AT (2017) Central bank digital currency and the future of monetary policy
    (No. w23711). National Bureau of Economic Research.
31. Adrian T, Mancini-Griffoli T (2019) The rise of digital money. Annu Rev Financ Econ 13:57–77
32. Barontini C, & Holden H (2019) Proceeding with caution-a survey on central bank digital currency.
    Proceeding with Caution-A Survey on Central Bank Digital Currency. BIS Paper, No. 101.
33. Mancini-Griffoli T, Peria MSM, Agur I, Ari A, Kiff J, Popescu A, & Rochon C (2018) Casting light
    on central bank digital currency. IMF staff discussion note, 8.
34. Ward O, & Rochemont S (2019) Understanding central bank digital currencies (CBDC). Institute
    and Faculty of Actuaries.
35. Miedema J, Minwalla C, Warren M, & Shah D (2020) Designing a CBDC for universal access.
    Bank of Canada Working Paper, No. 10.
36. Calle G, & Eidan D (2020) Central Bank Digital Currency: an innovation in payments. R3 White
    Paper, April.
37. Ozili PK (2022a) Can central bank digital currency increase financial inclusion? Arguments for and
    against. Emerald Series in Finance, Insurance and Risk Management.
38. Ponce MJL (2020) Digitalization, retail payments and Central Bank Digital Currency. Financial
    Stability Review 39:127–155
39. Huynh K, Molnar J, Shcherbakov O, & Yu Q (2020) Demand for payment services and consumer
    welfare: the introduction of a central bank digital currency. Bank of Canada, Working Paper, No 7.
40. Khiaonarong T, Humphrey D (2019) Cash use across countries and the demand for central bank
    digital currency. J Paym Strat Syst 13(1):32–46
41. Williamson SD (2021) Central bank digital currency and flight to safety. J Econ Dyn Control
    104146
42. Arner DW, Buckley RP, Zetzsche DA, & Didenko A (2020) After Libra, Digital Yuan and COVID-
    19: Central Bank digital currencies and the new world of money and payment systems. European
    Banking Institute Working Paper Series, No. 65.
43. Davoodalhosseini SM (2021) Central bank digital currency and monetary policy. J Econ Dyn Con-
    trol 104150
44. Stahel WR (2016) The circular economy. Nature News 531(7595):435
45. Brydges, T. (2021). Closing the loop on take, make, waste: Investigating circular economy prac-
    tices in the Swedish fashion industry. Journal of Cleaner Production, 293, 126245.
46. Salmenperä H, Pitkänen K, Kautto P, & Saikku L (2021) Critical factors for enhancing the circular
    economy in waste management. J Clean Prod 280:124339



                                                                                             13
1516                                                 Circular Economy and Sustainability (2022) 2:1501–1516


47. Chen X, Memon HA, Wang Y, Marriam I, Tebyetekerwa M (2021) Circular Economy and sustain-
    ability of the clothing and textile Industry. Materials Circular Economy 3(1):1–9
48. Geng Y, Sarkis J, Bleischwitz R (2019) How to globalize the circular economy? Nature 565:153–155
49. Chhimwal M, Agrawal S, & Kumar G (2021) Challenges in the implementation of circular economy in
    manufacturing industry. J Model Manag
50. Pincelli IP, de Castilhos Júnior AB, Matias MS, Rutkowski EW (2021) Post-consumer plastic packag-
    ing waste flow analysis for Brazil: The challenges moving towards a circular economy. Waste Manage
    126:781–790
51. Droege H, Raggi A, Ramos TB (2021) Overcoming current challenges for circular economy assess-
    ment implementation in public sector organisations. Sustainability 13(3):1182
52. Sepetis, A. (2022). Sustainable finance and circular economy. In Circular Economy and Sustainability
    (pp. 207–226). Elsevier.
53. Hassan MK, Saraç M, Alam AW (2020) Circular economy, sustainable development, and the role of
    Islamic finance. Istanbul University Press, Istanbul, Islamic Perspective for Sustainable Financial Sys-
    tem, pp 1–26
54. Demirel P, Danisman GO (2019) Growth and finance in the circular economy: Evidence from Euro-
    pean SMEs. In Academy of Management Proceedings 1:10747
55. Goovaerts L, & Verbeek A (2018) Sustainable banking: finance in the circular economy. In Investing
    in Resource Efficiency (pp. 191–209). Springer, Cham.
56. Shkliar AI (2020) The phenomenon of central banks’ digital currencies (CBDC): key attributes and
    implementation perspectives. Ukrainian Society 1(72):123–137
57. Usher A, Reshidi E, Rivadeneyra F, & Hendry S (2021) The positive case for a CBDC. Bank of Can-
    ada Working Paper No 11.
58. Maniff J, Wong P (2020) Comparing means of payment: what role for a central bank digital currency?
    FEDS Notes 08:13–22
59. Wiener M, Gall M, de Oliveira CC, & Lang R (2019) circular business model innovation–insights
    from Mr. Green Africa. Working Paper, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria.
60. Williamson S (2019) Central bank digital currency: welfare and policy implications. Unpublished,
    University of Western Ontario, p 4
61. Riccardi M, & Levi M (2018) Cash, crime and anti-money laundering. In The Palgrave Handbook of
    Criminal and Terrorism Financing Law (pp. 135–163). Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
62. Kumar, S. (2021). Permission blockchain network based central bank digital currency. In 2021 IEEE
    4th International Conference on Computing, Power and Communication Technologies (GUCON) (pp.
    1–6). IEEE.
63. Laboure M, Müller H-P, M., Heinz, G., Singh, S., & Köhling, S. (2021) Cryptocurrencies and CBDC:
    The Route Ahead. Global Pol 12(5):663–676
64. Oh EY, & Zhang S (2020) Central bank digital currency and in-formal economy. Working Papers in
    Economics & Finance, No 11. University of Portsmouth UK
65. Giudice F, Caferra R, Morone P (2020) COVID-19, the food system and the circular economy: Chal-
    lenges and opportunities. Sustainability 12(19):7939
66. Auer R, Haene P, & Holden H (2021) Multi-CBDC arrangements and the future of cross-border pay-
    ments. BIS Papers, No 115.
67. Agur I, Ari A, Dell’Ariccia G (2022) Designing central bank digital currencies. J Monet Econ
    125:62–79
68. Allen S, Čapkun S, Eyal I, Fanti G, Ford BA, Grimmelmann J, Juels A, Kostiainen K, Meiklejohn S,
    Miller A and Prasad E (2020). Design choices for central bank digital currency: Policy and technical
    considerations (No. w27634). National Bureau of Economic Research.
69. Engert W, & Fung BSC (2017) Central bank digital currency: Motivations and implications. Bank of
    Canada Staff Discussion Paper, No. 16.
70. Lee E (2018) Central bank digital currencies. Tools for an Inclusive Future? Belfer Center for Science
    and International Affairs, Research Paper.
71. Söilen KS, Benhayoun L (2022) Household acceptance of central bank digital currency: the role of
    institutional trust. Int J Bank Market 40(1):172–196
72. Ling-hua, D. I. N. G. (2007). A study on finance supporting the development of circular economy. Sci-
    ence Technology and Industry, 8.




13
