Economics & Education 2021 06(02) August

GLOBALIZATION

Viktor Boiko

Department of International Finance
Kyiv National Economic University named after Vadym Hetman, Kyiv, Ukraine
E-mail: viktorboiko@kneu.edu.ua
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2810-7788

Central banks digital currencies and prospects
for the Ukrainian economy
Abstract
The article is devoted to the study of the main directions of research on the introduction of digital money of
the world's leading central banks. The paper analyze the experience of the central banks of Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates in implementing a single digital dual-issue currency and cross-border payment
system (Aber project). Also we found the Helvetia project, a joint experiment of the BIS Innovation Hub, SIX
Group AG and the Swiss National Bank. The project provided issuance of a new wholesale digital currency by
the central bank and can be classified as a private permissioned peer-to-peer network with hierarchical access
to the ledger. Interesting for our study was the experience of creating a CBDC in Uruguay (E-Peso), where
CBDC have been issued in form of unique digital banknotes of several denominations. The article considers
the main prospects for the implementation of CBDC in Ukraine. The paper studies the use and legal status
of electronic digital signatures in Ukraine. Today, only reporting to regulatory authorities and document
flow between users is carried out using electronic digital signatures. CBDC and blockchain network can
provide secure storage of information by data centers of regulatory authorities and a common operational
space in the financial information channels. The blockchain network should be token-based, and service
providers could use an account-based retail payment system. The article defines the main characteristics of
token-based and account-based distributed ledgers. Attention is also paid to the anonymity of transactions
in payment systems, protection of personal data and the cultural component of cash circulation. Most
likely the introduction of CBDC will reduce the total amount of bank financing and banks need to consider
how to respond to potential loss of deposit funding. The most likely changes associated with CBDC is the
redistribution of profits that banks receive from cheap liabilities in favor of customers. This applies to the
owners of operating accounts, on which banks usually charge symbolic interest and which users keep in a
liquid form for making payments.

Keywords
Payment system,
Central bank,
cross-border payments,
blockchain, CBDC
JEL: E42, F33, O31

DOI: https://doi.org/10.30525/2500-946X/2021-2-13

1 Introduction
Modern central banks, being at the top of the money
pyramid, offer a two-tier payment system and issue two
types of money – paper money, which is a direct obligation
of the central bank, and a system of accounts for commercial
banks, which are essentially digital money issuers. The
central banks of the world's leading countries are actively
studying the benefits and problems of introducing a new
format of money – central bank digital currencies (CBDC).
The main purpose of central bank is to ensure the basic
functions of money – medium of exchange, store of value
and unit of account. But concerns arise from the structural
dependence of the banking system on incomes and savings
of their users.
Digital money of commercial institutions (banks,
financial companies, trading platforms and international
payment systems) has a number of risks for the national
payment system, including: legal, operational, credit,
liquidity, general commercial, settlement risks and the
most destructive – systemic risk. Each country has its own
characteristics of money circulation, monetary policy of
the central bank and the availability of payment services.
In different countries we can find different problems that

can be solved with digital money. Most central banks have
noted a significant decline in the role of cash for payments
in recent years, making commercial financial institutions
an almost monopoly providers of money – digital money,
which always has an intermediary for users. The decline in
cash transactions and the growing popularity of e-wallets,
cryptocurrencies and stablecoins in recent years have
made it increasingly difficult to control the money supply
of commercial banks.
One of the most likely changes associated with CBDC
is the redistribution of profits that banks receive from
cheap liabilities in favor of customers. This applies
to the owners of operating accounts, on which banks
usually charge symbolic interest and which users keep in
a liquid form for making payments. Digital money will
significantly change the rules for users – banks do not
need to know who pays whom and for what, and they
will not be the nominal holder of digital money. Banks
have invested in today's infrastructure and will probably
try to avoid additional costs against the background of
a possible outflow of such a cheap resource for them
as current accounts. Given the market share of stateowned banks in Ukraine, innovation issues are becoming
political.
73

Economics & Education 2021 06(02) August

2 Key research areas for CBDC
Experts of the Bank for International Settlements
noted that in some countries credit card fees reach more
than 1% of GDP, but in most countries there are several
payment systems, each of which provides different market
segments. These systems can be classified into three main
types: type of payment (wholesale or retail); operator
(central bank or private sector); and the calculation
mode (net or gross basis) (CBDCs: an opportunity for
the monetary system). CBDC are mainly proposed as a
complementary retail payment system, ie the third type of
money for the general public, which will complement the
paper cash system and the non-cash bank system.
R. Todd and M. Rogers combined the research of
central banks into a single document, which somewhat
simplified our study (Todd, Rogers, 2020). Most
CBDC offerings support a two-tier monetary system
architecture and mainly consider retail payment systems.
Special attention of central banks is also paid to crossborder payments. Although only a few central banks are
likely to progress to full project implementation and
digital currency issuance over the next 5 years, a few
have already completed or are in the process of initiating
progressive pilot projects. The two-tier architecture
assumes that financial intermediaries remain providers of
payment infrastructure, and CBDC users can store digital
money without the involvement of such intermediaries.
The technological solutions under consideration are
centralized infrastructure, permitted or permissionless
blockchain protocols.
An interesting experience in Uruguay offers the concept
of "digital banknotes". The Central Bank of Uruguay has
already completed a general-purpose CBDC pilot program.
In November 2017, the Central Bank of Uruguay launched
a pilot program to issue, distribute and test E-Peso
(Barontini, Holden, 2019). Unique digital banknotes of
several denominations have been issued for distribution
on the "electronic note manager platform". The platform
acted as a register of ownership of digital banknotes. A
total of 20 million electronic pesos were issued, of which
7 million were distributed by third-party PSPs that had
the equivalent value of pesos in a central bank account.
Transfers were peer-to-peer, via mobile phones, text
messages or E-Peso applications. Individual users and
companies in e-wallets held a maximum of 30,000 and
200,000 e-pesos, respectively.
The legal mandate of the Central Bank of Uruguay was
sufficient to issue electronic pesos in addition to physical

GLOBALIZATION

cash. The pilot was declared successful and closed in April
2018, after which all electronic pesos were canceled. The
program is currently under evaluation and a number of
issues are being considered before further testing and
potential issuance can be decided. These include specific
design tasks, such as how best to manage the stock of
digital banknotes of different denominations, as well as the
level of anonymity of E-Peso, whether it will have interest,
the ultimate role of the central bank and wider business
and economic impact.
Indeed, the design of coins and banknotes is a unique
feature of paper money. And if digital technology is able
to provide sufficient protection against counterfeiting,
then transferring the cultural component of money is
the next challenge for technology. The idea of creating
digital banknotes was implemented on public blockchains
in the Non fungible token (NFT) format. This format of
cryptocurrencies became quite popular and led to the
emergence of the digital art market (Makarov, 2021).
Central banks in their digital money research mainly
mention the retail payment system which can be created
in two versions – token-based or account-based distributed
ledgers (Ghose, 2021). Citigroup researchers identified the
main characteristics of each version (Table 1).
As an example of a wholesale payment system we found
project Helvetia, a joint experiment of the BIS Innovation
Hub, SIX Group AG and Swiss National Bank (Project
Helvetia). The project provided issuance of a new wholesale
digital currency by the central bank and establishing
a connection between the new SIX Digital Exchange
platform (SDX) and the existing central bank payment
system (RTGS) and Swiss Interbank Clearing (SIC).
Technically, the SDX platform can be classified as a private
permissioned peer-to-peer network with hierarchical
access to the ledger, which has three types of nodes:
– Participant nodes, that can store states, initiate new
transactions and execute business logic;
– SDX node, that can store states, initiate new
transactions, and execute special business logic
available only to SDX. For example, organizes and
executes multilateral instructions based on SDX
Trading and executes business logic for the issuance or
redemption of SDX coins;
– Notary node, which is also controlled by SDX and has
two important functions: (1) prevention of double
spending of assets in the network; and (2) ensuring the
finality of the calculations.
Most cross-border payments today are paid using
correspondent bank accounts. In this case, currency

TABLE 1 The main characteristics of token-based and account-based distributed ledgers
Tokens
– Chains of digital signatures
– May be offered by unregulated entities
– Public or private DLT database
– May or may not represent liability of an institution
– Programmable through ‘smart contracts’
– Wallets may or may not be KYC’d
– May be pseudonymous or anonymous
– Digital bearer instruments
– Synthetic and national currency units
– Atomic settlement – token transfer equals messaging & settlement
– ‘Always on’ infrastructure

Accounts
– Double entry bookkeeping ledgers
– Offered by regulated banks and non-banks
– Traditional database technology
– Liabilities of an institution to a depositor
– Programmable through APIs
– KYC on the account holder
– Not pseudonymous or anonymous
– Not a bearer instrument
– Denominated in national currency units
– Payment messaging and settlement are separate functions
– Batch processing and ‘store and forward’ messaging

Source: generated by the author based on (Ghose, 2021)

74

Economics & Education 2021 06(02) August

GLOBALIZATION

conversion usually involves multiple parties, meaning
fewer payments will be credited and hedged in the wholesale
markets by banks. Payment systems and payment methods
are different. Payment systems achieve cross-border and
currency interaction in three different ways (Auer, 2021):
1. Compatible standards (eg similar regulatory
frameworks, market practices, messaging formats and data
requirements).
2. Interconnected systems through technical interfaces,
common clearing mechanisms or appropriate schemes.
3. Establishment of a single multi-currency payment
system.
The Aber project was an initiative launched by the
central banks of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates to study the viability of a single digital dualissue currency as a tool for internal and cross-border
settlements between the two countries (Saudi central
bank…). Aber propose the wholesale CBDC and uses a
transaction model which is a hybrid between an account
and token model. There are two types of digital currency
transfer transactions: within a privacy group (sub-ledger)
and across privacy groups. A token model is used for
accounting movement of digital currency across subledgers. Once the digital currency is moved into a ledger,
it can be exchanged peer-to-peer using an account model.
This allows to decouple the privacy and safety concerns
and handle them in two different types of ledgers, using
different transaction models.
An important aspect of the project was the active
business and technical participation of commercial banks
from the earliest stage. In total, six commercial banks (three
from each jurisdiction) participated in all stages of the
project. Research has focused on cross-border payments,
interactions between multiple ledgers or technologies,
tokenization of multiple asset types, and atomic swaps.
Aber uses automated fund management features. This
works by predicting the liquidity shortage for the next
cycle, based on demand in the previous N cycles and the
state of input and output flows. This predicting is done for
each channel in which the bank participates.
Similar liquidity pools can be found in so-called
decentralized finance (Defi) on the Ethereum blockchain.
According to DeFi Pulse total value locked in DeFi is $ 69.56
billion (as of 1.08.2021). Figure 1 shows the growth of the
DeFi market in the last year (Total Value Locked in DeFi,
2021).
The privacy of user data and transactions in all studies
of central banks is determined by an important element of

payment security. The choice between complete anonymity
and user transparency is always a compromise. Experience
in the cryptocurrency market shows that anonymous
settlements create a favorable field for illegal activities.
First of all, this concerns drug traffick and cyber fraud, as
well as a wide range of services offered by the Darknet.
For CBDC implementation, the issues of the level of
anonymity, the process of identifying new users, the format
for accumulating and storing confidential data must be
resolved. For instance in the European Union, the General
Data Protection Regulation, GDPR (REGULATION (EU)
2016/679, 27 April 2016) came into force in May 2018.
Companies that process and collect personal data must be
built on the principle of "privacy by purpose and by default",
which means that personal data must be stored using
pseudonyms or complete anonymization. The business must
be able to deny such permission at any time. Businesses
must also report any data protection breach that negatively
impacts user privacy within 72 hours.
Programmable money is the next object for central banks
research. Companies often may have supply chains, which
waiting for products to be sold. Programmable money will
not only optimize payments for the end consumer, but also
for product producers in the supply chains. Also the money
reservation may allow pre-order products format. Today,
many companies are trying to work in direct sales and preorder deliveries.
Programmable money can also be in the form of mass
payment systems and micro payments. Large companies
often have to send a significant number of payments at
once, for instance, making wages to hundreds or thousands
of employees. These mass payments are usually not critical,
but require time to process. This is a question of database
compatibility. Micropayments – payments for small
amounts, the processing cost of which may be greater
than the cost of the payment itself. Micropayments can
support alternative revenue models for digital media (such
as moving away from existing subscription and advertising
models). They can also support the development of Internetof-Things (IoT) programs that connect networks of physical
devices.
3 Prospects for the implementation
of CBDC in Ukraine
In Ukraine, the official use of digital signatures began
in 2004 with the entry into force of the Law of Ukraine

FIGURE 1 Total value locked in DeFi, USD billion
75

Economics & Education 2021 06(02) August

GLOBALIZATION

"On Electronic Digital Signature", which established the
legal status of electronic digital signatures and defined
the conditions of its use. In 2017, this law was replaced
by the Law of Ukraine “On Electronic Trust Services”
(Law of Ukraine "On electronic trust services", 2017).
Ukrainian legislation provides for the operation of statelicensed certificate issuing centers that issue (generate)
digital signatures and guarantee their authenticity. The
user submits documents to the certification center for
confirmation of identity and authority and receives a pair of
keys – public and private. A copy of the public key is stored
in the certification center, which acts as a guarantor of the
authenticity of the issued key. Reporting to regulatory
authorities and interaction (now only document flow)
between users is carried out through electronic services
and software.
The emerging network of relationships is increasingly
becoming decentralized. In practice, users create their own
databases and have to take care of database backups on
their own. Also there are a number of state institutions
that issue digital signatures for their own usage, as well
as a number of digital services for tax reporting and the
state services provision. For instance, access to a personal
account on the official website of the State Fiscal Service
of Ukraine is carried out only using a digital signature.
State institutions act as public nodes, and users store their
pieces of the database.
Blockchain technology may ensure the formation of
a common database and verifiability of users without
their identification. The proof-of-database concept can
provide advanced features for private databases such
as ledger and CBDC. The database can contain not only
tax reports and commercial documents, but also digital
money. Thus, payments to counterparties and taxes can
be programmed. For instance, the use of smart contracts
can provide guaranteed peer-to-peer payment against
delivery. A digital VAT report in the form of a smart
contract could periodically conduct clearing calculations
and payments according to the data of the Unified
Register of Tax Invoices.
It should be noted that the legislation also requires
the use of secured physical devices for storing private
keys, which allow to protect the key from copying and

transferring to third parties – the signature is generated
and exists only for one specific device. According to the
Central Certification Body of the Ministry of Digital
Transformation of Ukraine, 7.2 million qualified
certificates of electronic signatures were generated in
2020, of which 822,800 were generated on secured devices
(Official site of the Ministry of Digital Transformation of
Ukraine). Table 2 shows the number of digital signatures
issued by authorized providers in 2020.
According to the National Bank of Ukraine, as
of April 1, 2021, UAH 550.2 billion banknotes and
UAH 3.6 billion coins were in circulation (The main
indicators of the banks of Ukraine, 2021). The growth of
cash in circulation began at the beginning of quarantine
and did not stop during 2020. The largest number of
banknotes with a face value of UAH 200 and coins with
a face value of 10 kopecks is in circulation (23.7 % and
29.1 %, respectively). A significant part of banknotes
with a face value of UAH 100, 200 and 500 are placed in
the network of ATMs. As of the end of 2020, commercial
banks held cash and cash equivalents in the amount of
UAH 73.2 billion (Table 3). Over the past 5 years, cash
balances in banks have doubled. We also note a significant
and stable share of foreign currencies in the assets and
liabilities of banks. Ukraine has a widespread market for
the exchange of foreign currencies, which is essentially
one more payment system in Ukraine.
The National Bank of Ukraine conducted a survey
of market participants on the potential demand for
the digital currency of the central bank – E-hryvnia and
possible options for its use (The results of the survey on the
possibility of introducing e-hryvnia, 2021). 100 financial
market experts took part in the survey, which ended this
year. According to experts, the most promising "use case"
of the E-hryvnia could potentially be a retail payment
system (primarily – P2P transfers between individuals
and e-commerce transactions). In second place in terms
of the number of survey points – E-hryvnia as a tool for
cross-border payments (primarily – P2P transfers between
individuals).
The results of the survey will be the basis for further
research by the National Bank of Ukraine. The following
areas are considered:

TABLE 2 The structure of the qualified digital signature service providers in 2020
Qualified provider
1

2

Users

Users share, %

Total number of
keys

Including on secured
physical devices

3

4

5

6

3 010 554

66,7

5 284 751

412 253

"Key Certification Center "Ukraine", LLC

546 733

12,1

608 313

54 936

3

Information and reference department of
the State Tax Service

444 236

9,8

534 089

37 155

4

"Ukrainian special systems", SE

112 534

2,5

285 805

369

5

"UkrSibbank", JSC

79 871

1,8

92 684

72 852

6

"DIYA", SE

67 201

1,5

82 305

32 194

7

State Treasury Service of Ukraine

57 127

1,3

85 281

85 281

8

"State Savings Bank of Ukraine", PJSC

56 073

1,24

92 586

92 586

9

"Art-master" (MasterKey), LLC

53 061

1,18

74 306

3 245

10

National Bank of Ukraine

1 159

0,03

1 279

756

4 510 880

98,2

7 243 966

822 764

1

"PRIVATBANK", JSC

2

Total:

Source: generated by the author based on (Official site of the Ministry of Digital Transformation of Ukraine)

76

Economics & Education 2021 06(02) August

GLOBALIZATION

TABLE 3 Assets and liabilities of Ukrainian banks in 2016–2020
Balance sheets
1

2

1

Number of operating banks

2

Assets, UAH bln

3
4

including in foreign currencies
Cash and cash equivalents

5

Funds in the National Bank of Ukraine

6

Loans provided

7
8

including business entities

2017

2018

2019

2020

3

4

5

6

7

96

82

77

75

73

1 256,3

1 333,8

1 359,7

1 493,3

1 822,8

519,1

506,9

494,6

492,2

585,5

36,2

44,1

46,9

56,3

73,2

40,8

37,4

35,5

76,1

37,6

1 005,9

1 036,7

1 118,9

1 033,4

960,6

847,1

864,4

919,1

821,9

749,3

157,4

170,8

196,9

206,7

199,6

9

Bonds and long-term investments

332,3

425,8

480,6

539,5

791,4

11

Net capital

123,8

161,1

155,0

199,9

209,5

12

Liabilities of banks

1 132,5

1 172,7

1 204,7

1 293,4

1 613,4

644,2

613,7

587,9

568,6

648,0

13

including individuals

2016

including in foreign currencies

14

Funds of business entities

369,9

404,0

406,4

498,2

646,5

15

Funds of individuals

437,2

478,1

508,5

552,1

681,9

Source: generated by the author based on (The main indicators of the banks of Ukraine, 2021)

– E-hryvnia for retail non-cash payments with the
possible functionality of "programmed" money and the
ability to make targeted social payments;
– E-hryvnia for use in the field related to the circulation
of virtual assets (for example, for exchange, issuance
and other transactions with virtual assets);
– E-hryvnia for cross-border payments.
4. Conclusion
The widespread adoption of digital money from
central banks requires a detailed analysis of a number
of technical, economic and legal issues. These issues
include impact on monetary policy, financial stability,
business models of banks, international cash flows and
supervision of service providers. Unification of user
identification process on the basis of digital signature can
lead to the emergence of lending, compliance, borrower
evaluation, project financing services. Such services will
be provided by financial institutions and this adds value
to interest-bearing commercial banks' money and expands
opportunities for joint investment and profit sharing. But
most likely the introduction of CBDC will reduce the total
amount of bank financing. Banks need to consider how to
respond to potential loss of deposit funding.
Decentralized transactions require the central bank to
establish basic standards (cryptography, user verification
and distributed ledger security) that will allow the use of
central bank money. Blockchain technology and proofof-database concept can provide (1) secure storage of
information by data centers of regulatory authorities (with
appropriate access mode) and (2) a common operational

space in the financial information channels. The blockchain
network should be token-based, and service providers could
use an account-based retail payment system.
The current sectors of NFT and DeFi in decentralized
payment systems need further research. Non fungible token
format can provide design and presentation of money to the
user on the smartphone screen not in the form of written
numbers with two decimal places, but as a set of banknotes
and coins of the usual denominations for paper money. The
programmed design of digital banknotes can add collectible
value to them. Defi is a relatively new market for digital
assets and demonstrates the example of creating liquidity
pools in currency pairs that can be used for cross-border
settlements.
The appropriate degree of anonymity in the CBDC
system is a political and social issue, not just a technical.
The CBDC must comply with anti-money laundering
regulations that exclude completely anonymous payments.
However, CBDC can be designed to protect privacy and
give users control over their personal data. A number of
CBDC studies suggest that CBDC is equivalent to cash, and
therefore it should offer the same degree of anonymity.
But anonymity of cash was not a basic necessity when cash
appeared. Many years ago, when digital payment systems
did not exist, the characteristics of paper money, such as
simplification of transportation, accountability and public
acceptance were more important than anonymity. Although
only a few central banks are likely to progress to digital
currency issuance over the next 5 years, a few have already
completed or are in the process of initiating progressive
pilot projects. But, nevertheless, in our opinion, paper
money will remain in the economy for a long time.

References
[1]
[2]

CBDCs: an opportunity for the monetary system. BIS Annual Economic Report (2021). Bank for International
Settlements. E-source: https://www.bis.org/publ/arpdf/ar2021e3.htm
Todd, R., & Rogers, M. (2020). A Global Look at Central Bank Digital Currencies: From Iteration to Implementation.
The Block Crypto. E-source: https://www.theblockcrypto.com/post/75022/a-global-look-at-central-bank-digitalcurrencies-full-research-report
77

Economics & Education 2021 06(02) August

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

GLOBALIZATION

Barontini, C., & Holden, H. (2019). Proceeding with caution – a survey on central bank digital currency. Bank for
International Settlements. E-source: https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap101.htm
Makarov, F. (2021). What is NFT. Startups, business, technology. E-source: https://vc.ru/crypto/214497-chtotakoe-nft (in Russian)
Ghose, R. at al. (2021). Future of money. Crypto, CBDCs and 21st Century Cash. Citigroup. E-source:
https://www.citivelocity.com/citigps/future-of-money
Project Helvetia: Settling tokenised assets in central bank money (2020). Bank for International Settlements.
E-source: https://www.bis.org/publ/othp35.htm
Auer, R. at al. (2021). Multi-CBDC arrangements and the future of cross-border payments. Bank for International
Settlements. E-source: https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap115.htm
Saudi central bank and Central bank of the UAE joint digital currency and distributed ledger project (2020).
Central Bank of the U.A.E. E-source: https://www.centralbank.ae/en/node/2382
Total Value Locked in DeFi (2021). DeFi Pulse. E-source: https://defipulse.com/
Law of Ukraine "On electronic trust services" (2017). E-source: https://zakon.rada.gov.ua/laws/show/2155-19
(in Ukrainian)
Official site of the Ministry of Digital Transformation of Ukraine. czo.gov.ua. E-source: https://czo.gov.ua/
development?tab=1 (in Ukrainian)
The main indicators of the banks of Ukraine (2021). National Bank of Ukraine. E-source: https://bank.gov.ua/ua/
statistic/supervision-statist/data-supervision#1 (in Ukrainian)
The results of the survey on the possibility of introducing e-hryvnia (2021). National Bank of Ukraine. E-source:
https://bank.gov.ua/ua/news/all/rezultati-opituvannya-schodo-mojlivosti-zaprovadjennya-e-grivni (in Ukrainian)

78

