       China Economic Journal




       ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rcej20




Introduction to the special issue on digital
currency

Yang Ji & Yan Shen

To cite this article: Yang Ji & Yan Shen (2021) Introduction to the special issue on digital
currency, China Economic Journal, 14:1, 1-3, DOI: 10.1080/17538963.2020.1870283

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/17538963.2020.1870283




       Published online: 28 Jan 2021.



       Submit your article to this journal



       Article views: 704



       View related articles



       View Crossmark data




                       Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
              https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcej20
CHINA ECONOMIC JOURNAL
2021, VOL. 14, NO. 1, 1–3
https://doi.org/10.1080/17538963.2020.1870283




Introduction to the special issue on digital currency
Yang Jia and Yan Shenb
a
 Department of Finance, School of Economics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China; bInstitute of Digital
Finance, National School of Development, Peking University, Beijing, China



Although money in digital form is not new to modern economics, advances in technol­
ogy have led to a revolution in digital currencies and have facilitated instantaneous peer-
to-peer transfers of value, which was previously impossible. The advent of new digital
currencies could redefine the way in which payments and users’ data interact, reshape the
nature of currency competition, and rebuild the architecture of the international mone­
tary system (Brunnermeier, James, and Landau 2019).
   During the last decade, digital currencies have surfaced in a variety of contexts. The
earliest context was cryptocurrencies (CPMI, 2015), such as Bitcoin and Litecoin, which
are typically issued and transferred via a decentralized distributed ledger. They are not
a liability of any entity and not backed by any authority and thus have zero intrinsic
value. Their values are unstable as they are driven by the belief that other market
participants would accept them as a means of payment or that their value will continue
to increase at a later point. As a result, they are now viewed more as speculative assets
rather than a medium of exchange.
   A special type of cryptocurrency called Stablecoin, such as Libra (proposed by Facebook)
and Tether, share a decentralized nature with Bitcoin, but differ in that Stablecoin attempt
to maintain price stability. There are generally two ways to ensure that Stablecoins are
stable – through collaterals or through algorithms. Collateralized Stablecoins are usually
backed by reserve assets, including fiat currency reserves like the US dollar, commodities
like oil, or precious metals like gold or silver. Algorithmic Stablecoins do not use reserves
but retain a stable price by controlling the supply of coins, implemented by an autonomous
consensus mechanism and smart contracts. Given their (alleged) capacity to preserve value
over time, the use of Stablecoins, especially those issued by Big-Tech firms, could rise as
global payment instruments and pose governance challenges for international finance and
monetary policies (FSB, 2020).
   Given that new technologies and market entrants challenge the traditional bank-based
payment systems, 80% of central banks worldwide are currently considering a new type
of digital currency controlled by central banks, that is, central bank digital currencies
(CBDCs) (Boar, Holden, and Wadsworth 2020). CBDCs are new variants of central bank
money that are different from physical cash or central bank reserve/settlement accounts.
There are two broad types of CBDCs which are based on their different levels of
accessibility: wholesale CBDCs or retail CBDCs. The former is a restricted-access digital


CONTACT Yan Shen           yshen@nsd.pku.edu.cn           Institute of Digital Finance, National School of Development, Peking
University, Beijing, China
© 2021 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
2      Y. JI AND Y. SHEN


token for wholesale settlements such as interbank payments. The latter is widely available
to the general public for retail transactions and could be based on tokens or accounts.
CBDCs have a number of potential benefits, such as strengthening the resilience and
contestability of payment systems, better controlling illicit payments and money laun­
dering, and overcoming the zero lower bound and providing additional monetary policy
instruments. However, central banks are also aware of potential risks of CBDC use,
including the risk of structural disintermediation, centralization of credit allocation, and
the risk of facilitating systemic runs on banks during crises.
    Among all current CBDC projects, Chinese retail CBDC, called the Digital
Currency and Electronic Payment project, is at the most advanced stage (Auer,
Cornelli, and Frost 2020). Pilot testing is underway in four cities and in the ‘2022
Winter Olympic Office Area’ in Beijing. There is a gap in academic research regarding
the effect of Chinese CBDC on its financial system, macroeconomics, and international
payments.
    The aim of this special issue is to facilitate a synergistic discussion on understanding
the impacts and implications of digital currency. To be more focused, we present papers
on these three topics: the technology innovation which makes new forms of digital
currency possible; Stablecoins and the cross-border payments; and CBDC under global
competition.
    The first article, ‘What Blockchains can do and cannot do?’, Zhong Xu and Chuanwei
Zou address the economic logic and applications of blockchian, the technology enabler of
digital currencies. They touched on smart contracts, tokens, blockchain’s government
functions and blockchain-based financial infrastructure, which is represented by stable­
coins and central bank digital currencies and closely related to later articles. Their work
provides a technology baseline for the following discussions.
    Dong He’s article, ‘Digitalization of Cross-Border Payments’, explores the possible
evolution of cross-border payment systems as they become more digitalized, and the
macro-financial consequences of digital currencies across borders. He argues that the
digital technology has provided a unique window of opportunity to fix the decades-old
problem of low efficiency and high cost of cross-border payment system.
    In ‘The Potential Impacts and Risks of Global Stablecoins’, Cangshu Li and Yan Shen
also investigate the implications of digital currencies in cross-border payments, but from
a different aspect. With a focus on global stablecoins and related risks, they consider
whether the possible large-scale usage of global stablecoins will lead to dollarization of
a country’s monetary system and find an impact on both large and small open economies.
They caution that global stablecoins may affect financial stability through monetary
policy, holder confidence and financial system.
    In the forth article,‘A Global Perspective on Central Bank Digital Currency’, Lee and
coauthors Yan and Wang provides a conceptual framework of CBDC and discuss the key
considerations of CBDC design to balance benefits and risks. Using China’s CBDC as an
illustration, this paper proposes several enablers of mass adoption and successful imple­
mentation, which allows central banks to focus on the monitoring and control, without
bearing all the load or exposing to over-centralized risks. From a global perspective, they
conclude that countries conversant with the CBDC relevant technology will have
a competitive advantage.
                                                                   CHINA ECONOMIC JOURNAL      3


   Yiping Huang and Shiyun Li’s paper, ‘The Genesis, Design and Implications of
China’s Central Bank Digital Currency’ provides a detailed discussion on China’s
CBDC, named e-CNY, which may become the first CBDC released by major central
banks in the future. The possibility of disintermediation effect of CBDC on commercial
banks cannot be fully ruled out, even though PBC has tried hard to avoid it. CBDC could
also influence the collection and analyses of big data in the Chinese Fintech sector, which
relies highly on the existing mobile payment system. They conclude that even the modest
step of creating e-CNY could significantly transform the financial landscape in China.
   In ‘A Study of Economic Impact of Central Bank Digital Currency under Global
Competition’, Tong Wu and Jiayou Chen review the global development and competi­
tion of digital currencies, and innovatively provide a quantitative analysis of the eco­
nomic impact of the issuance of Chinese CBDC based on a four-sector DSGE model.
They predict that the insurance of CBDC could enhance the economic growth rate by
0.15% in China and reduce the leverage ratio to a certain degree. They contend that
China should accelerate the research and promotion of its CBDC.
   In the last article, ‘China, the United States, and Central Bank Digital Currencies: It
May Not Matter Who is First’, Martin Chorzempa critiques the common framing of
CBDC development as a race and elaborates on the reasons behind the stark divergence
of China and the United States in central bank digital currency development. He
concludes that a first mover advantage in CBDC is likely to be short lived due to the
rapid changes in the technology in the global market for digital currencies.
   One common theme of all these seven papers is that, explicitly or implicitly, all authors
acknowledge that digital currency may have far-reaching impacts on almost all aspects of
social and economic activities. One special issue surely cannot cover discussions on all
the important changes, the goal here is merely to begin an initial exchange of ideas,
perspectives, and approaches toward understanding the role of digital currency for the
future, with the hope that more scholars will join this research agenda to produce many
more insightful discussions.


Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).


References
Auer, R., G. Cornelli, and J. Frost, 2020. “Rise of the Central Bank Digital Currencies: Drivers,
  Approaches and Technologies.” BIS Working Papers, No. 880.
Boar, C., H. Holden, and A. Wadsworth. 2020. “Impending Arrival: A Sequel to the Survey on
  Central Banking Digital Currency.” BIS Paper, No. 107.
Brunnermeier, M., H. James, and J.-P. Landau. 2019. “The Digitalization of Money.” NBER
  working paper, w26300.
CPMI (Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures). 2015. “Digital Currencies.” BIS
  CPMI report on digital currencies, November.
FSB (Financial Stability Board). 2020. “Regulation, Supervision and Oversight of ’Global
  Stablecoin’ Arrangements.” https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P131020-3.pdf
