Turkish Journal of Computer and Mathematics Education Vol.12 No. 11 (2021), 4279- 4285
Research Article
China’s National Digital Currency: An Overview of Digital Currency Electronic
Payment
Xiang Zou1*, Qiang Cao2
1

School of Accounting and Finance, Wuxi Vocational Institute of Commerce, Wuxi, China

2

International College, Krirk University, Bangkok, Thailand

* justinzz1989@hotmail.com
Article History: Received: 11 January 2021; Revised: 12 February 2021; Accepted: 27 March 2021; Published
online: 10 May 2021
ABSTRACT: Digital Currency Electronic Payment (DCEP) is the Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) of
China. It is significantly different from electronic currency and third-party payment instruments. DCEP is issued
through the dual mode which consists of the central bank and commercial banks. It operates and circulates based
on the framework of Digital Currency Registration Center, Identity Authentication Center and Big Data Analysis
Center. Compared with the encrypted digital currency based on blockchain technology, DCEP has the
characteristics of centralized management. DCEP will have profound impacts on the effectiveness of monetary
policy, the operation of banks and payment institutions, the development of digital economy, the
internationalization of CNY and even social governance.
Keywords: CBDC, DCEP, FinTech, China.
INTRODUCTION TO CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY
In recent years, with the increasing attention paid to Bitcoin (BTC), digital currency has become a global
research hotspot. The innovation of financial technology (FinTech) and the development of digital economy
make the form of money evolve continuously. The research on digital currency has gradually changed from its
decentralized characteristics to the legal tender which is based on the central bank. Under the support of national
credit, Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) will become a new situation of various national currencies in the
coming future. According to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), more than 80% of countries have the
intention to issue CBDC (Boar, 2020)1, as shown in Figure 1. It is believed that CBDC is an inevitable trend of
the evolution of monetary form in the era of digital economy.

Fig. 1. Central banks continue to work on CBDC

4279

China’s National Digital Currency: An Overview of Digital Currency Electronic Payment

The attitude of the United States towards CBDC is prudent. The Federal Reserve has been working on
issues such as financial stability, market structure, security, privacy and monetary policy arising from CBDC.
After the release of the Libra white paper, the attitude of EU countries towards CBDC has become positive. The
European Central Bank (ECB) has designed the core guidelines for the digital euro which are based on the
current euro-system policies (ECB, 2020)2. The Bank of England in the United Kingdom also believes that
digital currency can use the latest FinTech to make transactions easier and faster for consumers (Bank of
England, 2020)3. According to the CBDC report issued by the Bank of Japan in Tokyo, Japan is ready for the
changes brought by digital currency and will implement the CBDC project. In addition, Singapore and Thailand
have made it clear that CBDC will be launched soon in their countries. The Bahamas and Sweden have planned
to complete the technical test and pilot operation of CBDC during 2020-2021. Ecuador, Tunisia, Senegal,
Marshall Islands, Uruguay and Venezuela also hope to solve economic and political problems by issuing CBDC
(Shilin & Xuejun, 2021)4.
In order to meet the needs of digital economic development and maintain the order of the national financial
market, the People's Bank of China (PBC) began to conduct research on digital currency in 2014. In 2019, PBC
clearly proposed the name of CBDC in China as Digital Currency Electronic Payment (DCEP). Since 2020,
PBC has successively carried out DCEP internal closure pilot test in Shenzhen, Suzhou, Chengdu, Xiong'an and
future Winter Olympic scenarios (Yonghong & Lu, 2020)5. With the completion of the fundamental design,
functional development and joint debugging test of DCEP, China is accelerating the revolutionary process into
the digital economy era. This paper will summarize the impact of DCEP on China's financial system by
introducing the concept, characteristics, operating framework and issuance mode, so as to have a more
comprehensive and in-depth understanding of the CBDC.

THE CONCEPT AND CHARACTERISTICS OF DIGITAL CURRENCY ELECTRONIC PAYMENT
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN DCEP AND ELECTRONIC CURRENCY
Understanding the concept of DCEP is helpful to distinguish it from other digital currencies and electronic
currencies. Guoping and Huiting (2019)6 pointed out that DCEP is the CBDC issued by the Central Bank of
China, which is endorsed by national credit. DCEP improves the blockchain technology and realizes the
combination of digital currency and electronic payment. From the perspective of currency level, DCEP has the
attribute of cash (M0), and its essence is to replace cash in circulation, rather than simply conduct the existing
currency electronically. It is noted that China's DCEP used a centralized issuance mechanism, which makes
traditional deposit accounts and DCEP accounts exist at the same time (Yan et al. 2020) 7.
In terms of payment, transformation and settlement, DCEP is as efficient as electronic currency. The
significant difference between them lies in the nature of money. The electronic currency is not unlimited legal
tender, so the part exceeding the protection limit of the deposit insurance system will cause the risk of
bankruptcy loss. However, DCEP has unlimited legal compensation and credit endorsement from the state and
the central bank. The electronic currency is a form of digital deposit, which mainly includes enterprise current
deposits in M1, enterprise time deposits and personal savings deposits in M2. The electronic currency needs to
be transferred through bank accounts, while DCEP does not need to be bound to bank accounts. In addition, the

4280

Xiang Zou1*, Qiang Cao2

electronic currency cannot be paid offline, while DCEP supports "dual offline" payment between revenue and
expenditure (Yuhang, 2020)8. Therefore, the digital currency represented by DCEP will bring new opportunities
and challenges to the transformation of monetary form.

THE ADVANTAGES OF DCEP OVER THIRD-PARTY PAYMENT INSTRUMENTS
Although DCEP is a substitute for cash in circulation, its characteristics and operating framework make it
significantly different from third-party payment instruments. In order to adapt to the needs of diversified
applications, DCEP covers the features of convertibility, convenience, acceptance, availability and low cost. On
the other hand, DCEP includes the characteristics of security, continuity, flexibility, availability, scalability and
interoperability as well. Additionally, it needs to establish a sound legal framework and clear implementation
standards so as to operate effectively. According to the exploration of issuance and circulation mechanisms,
Yanhong et al. (2020)9 found that DCEP has the characteristics of controllable anonymousness, traceability and
programmability, which can provide important support for the development of digital economy. In this context,
DCEP can help to carry out anti-money laundering, anti-fraud and combating terrorist financing in a better way.
DCEP is aimed to mitigate the issuance and circulation costs of traditional banknotes, to improve the
operation efficiency of financial infrastructure, and to promote the development of inclusive finance. Through
the comparison between DCEP and other third-party payment instruments such as Alipay and WeChat payment,
we can further understand the difference between DCEP and electronic currency. The summary is shown in
Table 1. The advantage of DCEP is that it is endorsed by national credit, does not need to bind bank accounts,
and supports offline payment. Therefore, compared with third-party payment instruments and cash, DCEP can
provide with safer and more convenient payment options.

Table 1. The Difference between DCEP and Third-Party Payment Instruments
Item

DCEP

Third-Party Payment Instruments

Currency Level

National credit endorsement.
Substitution of cash in circulation
(M0).

Generally considered as current
deposit (M1).

Connection with
Bank Accounts

No bank account binding is required.
Creation of digital wallet for DCEP
usage.

Bank accounts must be bound in
order to use third-party payment
instruments.

Service Condition

Impact on Monetary
Policy

Support online transaction and
offline wallet transaction. No
network can also be used through
NFC technology.
Control currency status through
smart contracts. Monetary policy
innovation realizes economic
adjustment.

Internet payment must be connected
to the network in order to operate
normally.
Sluggish economic adjustment of
traditional monetary policy. Weak
direct control of the central bank.

THE ISSUANCE AND OPERATION OF DIGITAL CURRENCY ELECTRONIC PAYMENT
THE MONETARY ISSUANCE OF DCEP

4281

China’s National Digital Currency: An Overview of Digital Currency Electronic Payment

The issuance and circulation of DCEP depends on the dual mode, which consists of the central bank and
commercial banks. In this case, the central bank is responsible for issuing DCEP, and commercial banks as well
as the Central Bank jointly maintain the normal operation of the DCEP issuance system, as shown in Figure 2
(Chuanwei, 2019)10. When DCEP is issued, commercial banks deposit 100% of reserves with the central bank.
The central bank then issues DCEP to commercial banks and entrusts them to publicly provide services such as
deposit, withdrawal, exchange and transfer of DCEP. Compared with the direct issuance of DCEP by the central
bank, the dual mode is more suitable for China’s national digital currency, which helps to reduce the issuance
cost and avoid high financing cost (Shuzhe & Xingguo, 2020) 11. Meanwhile, the issuance mode of DCEP can
improve the issuance efficiency and circulation security, which can better satisfy the market requirement.

Fig. 2. The Issuing Mechanism of DCEP

THE OPERATING FRAMEWORK OF DCEP
DCEP is the legal tender in digital form issued by the central bank of China. Its operating framework is
summarized and shown in Figure 3. Shi (2020) 12 pointed out that DCEP is the only national digital currency in
China that is endorsed by the state credit and issued by the central bank. DCEP is equivalent to China Yuan
(CNY), meanwhile, it owns the characteristics of centralization. The PBC is the sole issuer and is responsible
for issuing DCEP to commercial banks rather than directly to the market. Commercial banks are responsible for
the acceptance of DCEP to enterprises and individuals. The Digital Currency Registration Center (DCRC),
Identity Authentication Center (IAC) and Big Data Analysis Center (BDAC) are responsible for maintenance
and support.

4282

Xiang Zou1*, Qiang Cao2

Fig. 3. The Operating Framework of DCEP

The DCRC records the user's personal information and cash flows, so as to carry out ownership registration.
The IAC confirms the user identification. The BDAC analyzes transaction data based on big data, cloud
computing, blockchain and other technologies, which can effectively supervise the capital operation. ensure
transaction security and prevent illegal transactions. In this context, it can ensure the safety of transactions and
effectively crack down on illegal business. The operating framework of DCEP is significant to centralized
management, which can ensure the independence of monetary policy and the stability of DCEP value. It is
conducive to reducing the currency-conversion cost of CNY and accelerating the internationalization of it.

THE STATUS AND PROSPECT OF DIGITAL CURRENCY ELECTRONIC PAYMENT
THE TECHNICAL SUPPORT OF DCEP
Since the successful application of blockchain technology in bitcoin, people have habitually associated
encryption currency and digital currency with blockchain. However, whether the CBDC is based on blockchain
technology remains controversial. Some academics believe that the infrastructure of the CBDC does not need to
rely entirely on the blockchain, but only refers to some parts of the blockchain technology (Jianyu, 2020) 13. The
credit of the CBDC comes from the state. It is not necessary to use the consensus and trust mechanisms of the
blockchain to confirm each transaction, which will lead to inefficiency. In the analysis of the relationship
between the national digital currency and the blockchain, Tong (2020)14 found that China's national digital
currency would use blockchain technology in the confirmation and registration process.
Following the evolution of digital currency, it can be seen that decentralized public chains are suitable for
the application of encryption digital currency such as BTC, while centralized proprietary chains can meet the

4283

China’s National Digital Currency: An Overview of Digital Currency Electronic Payment

requirements of large-scale transactions of CBDC. Blockchain is only a means to achieve decentralized digital
currency, while DCEP is a centralized currency, and the central bank does not recommend the transformation of
traditional payment system based on blockchain (Shi, 2020) 12. In addition, keeping the characteristics of
centralization can greatly improve the transaction efficiency of digital currency. Therefore, if the innovative
features such as asymmetric encryption, traceability and smart contracts can be coupled in the issuance,
circulation and consumption of blockchain technology, the transaction efficiency can be improved, the
transaction cost can be reduced, and the possibility of digital economy can be stimulated.
THE CHALLENGES OF DCEP TO TRADITIONAL FINANCIAL SYSTEM
DCEP is a new type of currency, which has the characteristics that traditional currency does not have, so it
may impact the traditional financial system. The issuance of DCEP may cause adverse effects on bank credit,
and the central bank may be forced to become the "lender of last resort" to bear the financial risks of
commercial banks at all times (Dexu & Bo, 2019)15. In this context, it poses challenges to financial stability and
national security. Distributed ledgers are used in DCEP, which will lead to decentralized transaction information
processing, thus increasing the difficulty of supervision. At the same time, the issuance of DCEP may affect the
structure of the payment market and reduce the relevant income of commercial banks and Payment institutions
due to fierce competition (Wei et al., 2019) 16. The risk-free DCEP provides a safer deposit alternative and may
also increase the bank run. Therefore, although DCEP plays a positive role in the digital economy, it is also
necessary to carefully assess its possible impact on the traditional financial system.

CONCLUSION
By combing the latest research and development trends, it can be found that DCEP is the national digital
currency of China to replace cash in circulation. It is significantly different from electronic currency and
third-party payment instruments. DCEP is issued through the dual mode which consists of the central bank and
commercial banks. It operates and circulates based on the framework of three centers, namely DCRC, IAC and
BDAC. Compared with the encrypted digital currency based on blockchain technology, DCEP has the
characteristics of centralized management. DCEP will have profound impacts on the effectiveness of monetary
policy, the operation of banks and payment institutions, the development of digital economy, the
internationalization of CNY and even social governance. Although China has been at the forefront of digital
currency research, there are still many opportunities and challenges for DCEP in the future.

REFERENCES
1.

Boar, C., H. Holden, and A. Wadsworth. "Impending Arrival – A Sequel to the Survey on Central Bank
Digital Currency." BIS Papers, no 107, January, (2020).

2.

ECB. "Report on a Digital Euro." October, (2020).

3.

Bank of England. "Central Bank Digital Currency: Opportunities, Challenges and Design." March,
(2020).

4.

Shilin, Li, and Xuejun, Li. "International Comparison of Central Bank Digital Currency and
Development Prospect of DCEP." New Economy Guide, 26.1(2021).

4284

Xiang Zou1*, Qiang Cao2

5.

Yonghong, Tu, and Lu, Diao. "Digital Trade: Activating the Digital Gene of Commercial Banks."
Modern Commercial Bank, 52.19(2020).

6.

Guoping, Huang, and Huiting, Sun. " DCEP is Moving Towards Legal Digital Currency." Banker,
261.10(2019).

7.

Yan, Yan, Lirong, Wang, and Qin, Zhang. "Central Bank Legal Digital Currency: Structure and
Function." Economic Research Reference, 69.46(2020).

8.

Yuhang, Zhang. "Large-Scale Pilot Promotion and The Implementation of DCEP is Expected." China
Development Watch, 71.8(2020).

9.

Yanhong, Chen, Jiangzhong, Yu, and Zhen, Li. "Economic Effect of Central Bank's Digital Currency
and Prudent Management Approach." Dongyue Discussion Cluster, 318.41(2020).

10. Chuanwei, Zou. "A Preliminary Analysis of Digital Currency and Electronic Payment of The People's
Bank of China." New Finance, 12.10(2019).
11. Shuzhe, Zhang, and Xingguo, Han. " DCEP Operation Model, Policy Impact and Development
Suggestions." Theory Monthly, 50.10(2020).
12. Shi, Cheng. "Speed Up the Research and Development of Digital Currency to Cope with The
Competition for The Future Upgrading of the International Monetary System." Modern Commercial
Bank, 20.13(2020).
13. Jianyu, Xiong. "Prospects of Digital Currency." Times Finance, 36.31(2020).
14. Tong, Wu, Jiaqi, Li, and Mengyu, Chen. "The Theoretical Basis and Operating Mechanism of National
Digital Currency." Guizhou Social Sciences, 139.3(2020).
15. Dexu, He, and Bo, Yao. "The Practical Impact of The Legalization of RMB Digital Currency and
Countermeasures." Financial Review, 38.5(2019).
16. Wei, Zhang, Wei, Dong, and Fengqi, Zhang. "The Impact of Central Bank Digital Currency on
Payment, Monetary Policy and Financial Stability." Shanghai Finance, 59.1(2019).

4285

